Welcome to another Mathologer video. The
shoelace formula is a super simple wayto calculate the exact area inside any
convoluted curve made up of straightline segments, like my cat head curve
over there. Even the great mathematicianCarl Friedrich Gauss was impressed by
this formula and mentioned it in hiswritings. The formula was certainly not
invented by him, however it's often alsoreferred to as Gauss's area formula,
probably because a lot of people firstlearned about it from Gauss (and not
because someone calculated Gauss's areawith it :) In today's video I'll show you
how and why this formula works. Thevisual proof I'll show you is just as
pretty as the formula itself and alongthe way I can promise you a couple of
very satisfying AHA moments to make yourday. I've got a special treat for you at theend of the video: a simple way to morph
the shoelace formula into a very famousand very powerful integral formula for
calculating the area enclosed by reallycomplicated curvy curves, like for
example this deltoid rolling curve here.Now obviously we call this crazy
formula the shoelace formula because itreminds us of the usual crisscross way
of lacing shoes. Now let's make sense ofthe shoelace formula and use it to
calculate the orange area. I start byfilling in the coordinates of the blue
points. Take one of these points and moveits coordinates to the right. Now we
traverse the curve in thecounterclockwise direction and do the
same for the other blue points we comeacross. Here, there, there, there. Now we're
back at the point we started from andinclude its coordinates one more time at
the end of our list. Now draw in thecrosses. Okay this green segment stands
for the product of the two numbers atits ends. So 4 times 1 equals 4.This red segment stands for minus theproduct of the number at its two ends.
So 4 times 0 equals0. Minus that is - 0. Oh, well obviously
the "minus" is not important here but it willbe later. Green again. So 0 times 5
equals 0. Red again, we need tocalculate minus the product, so 1 times - 2
equals -2. Minus that, and so on. So we get twoproducts for every cross, one taken
positive and one negative. Now adding upall the numbers gives 110. Okay, almost
there. The formula tells us to divide by two.So half of 110 is 55, and that's the area
of my cat head. Really pretty and supersimple to use. And this works for any
closed curve in the xy-plane no matterhow complicated. The only thing you have
to make sure of is that the curve doesnot intersect itself like this fish
curve here. And it will become clear lateron why you have to be careful in this
respect. Okay now for the reallyinteresting bit, the explanation why the
shoelace formula works. It turns out thatthe individual crosses in the formula
correspond to these triangles whichcover the whole shape. Note that all
these triangles have the point (0,0) incommon. Okay, so the area of the first trianglehere is just 1/2 times the first cross.
So, again, the first cross is equal to 4times 1 minus 4 times 0 equals 4, and
half that is 2. And it's actually easy tocheck that this is true using the good
old 1/2 base times height area formulafor triangles. Now the area of the
second triangle is 1/2 times the secondcross, and so on. But why is the area of
one of these triangles equal to 1/2times the corresponding cross? Here's a
nice, really really nice visual argumentdue to the famous mathematician Solomon Golomb. What we want to convinceourselves of is this. So let's calculate
the area of this trianglefrom scratch. Actually what we'll do is
to calculate the area of thisparallelogram here whose area is double
that of the triangle. Okay let's startwith the special rectangle here. Then the
coordinates translate into the sidelengths of these two triangles. First (a,b)
turns into these two side lengths, andthen (c,d) into these. Color in the
remainder of the rectangle and shiftthe green triangles like this, and like
that,Now do you see the second small
rectangle materializing? Right there. Thetwo triangles overlap in the dark
green area and so we can pull thecolored bits apart so that they fill
exactly the parallelogram and the littlerectangle. Since we started out with the
colored bits filling a large rectanglethis means that "large rectangle area"
equals "parallelogram area" plus "smallrectangle area". But now the areas of the
rectangles are  ad  and  bc.  That's almostit.Now, without any words... Pure magic,
right? And, of course, all of you who arefamiliar with vectors and matrices will
realize that another way of expressingwhat we just proved is the mega famous
result from elementary linear algebrathat the area of the parallelogram spanned
by the two vectors (a,b) and (c,d)  is equalto the determinant of the 2 x 2 matrix
a,b,c,d. Anyway, back to the shoeless formula.At this point we just need to divide by
2 to get the area of the triangle andthat's it, right? That completes the proof
that the shoeless formula will always work,right? Well, not quite. We are still missing one very importantvery magical step. Let's have another
look at my cat hat, but let's shift it sothat the point (0,0) is no longer inside
and again move around the curve andhighlight the triangles whose area the
shoeless formula adds. This time let'sstart here. As we move around the curve
in the counterclockwise direction thegreen radius which chases us 
also rotates around (0,0) in thecounterclockwise direction. Something
does not look right here. The yellowtriangles are sticking out of the cat
head and at this point the combined areaof the triangle is larger than that of
the cat head and should get even largeras we keep going. However, whereas up to now the radius has been rotating in thecounterclockwise direction, at this point
it starts rotating in the clockwisedirection and this change in sweeping
direction has the effect that theshoeless formula subtracts the areas of
the blue triangles. And this means thatthe area calculated by the shoelace
formula will be the total area of theyellow triangles minus that of the blue
triangles which is exactly the area ofour cat head again. The same sort of
nifty canceling of areas makes sure thatno matter how convoluted a closed curve
is as long as it doesn't intersectitself the shoelace formula will always
give the correct area. Here's an animatedcomplicated example in which I
dynamically update what area theshoelace formula has arrived at at
the different points of the radiuschanging sweeping direction.Real mathematical magic, isn't it?
It's also easy to see why reversing thesweeping direction leads to negative
area. Let's see.Sweeping in the counterclockwise
direction we first come across (a,b) andrecord it, followed by (c,d). When we sweep clockwisethe order in which we come across (a,b)
and (c,d) is reversed and this leads tothese changes in the formulas. And the
last swap obviously leads to the numberturning into it's negative. And that's
really it. Now you know how the shoelaceformula does what it does. In these
videos we keep encountering really fancycurves like this cardioid in a coffee
cup in the "Mandelbrot and times tables"video or this deltoid rolling curve
whose area actually already played aquite important role in the video on the
Kakeya needle problem. At first glance itlooks like we won't be able to use the
shoelace formula to calculate the areaof one of these curves because they are
not made up from line segments. Well youcan definitely approximate the area by
calculating the area of a straight lineapproximation like this, with those blue
points on the curve. And by increasingthe number of points we can get as close
to the true area as we wish. In fact, bytaking this process to the limit in the
usual calculus way, we can turn theshoelace formula into a famous integral
formula for calculating the exact areaenclosed by complicated curves like the
deltoid. Here's how you do this. I'vetried to make sure that even if you've
never studied calculus you'll be able toget something out of this. Well we'll see,
fingers crossed :) A curve like this isoften given in parametric form. For
example this is a parametrizations ofthis deltoid. Here x(t) and y(t) are the
coordinates of a moving point thattraces the curve as the parameter t
changes from, in this case 0 to 2 pi. Let'shave a look. So here's the position of the point at t=0.And once it gets going the
slider up there tells you what t we areup to. Right now we'll translate all this
into the language of calculus. Let's stopthe point somewhere along its journey. A
little bit further along we find asecond point. A tiny, tiny little bit
further on is usually expressed in termsof infinitesimal displacements in x and
y. It's a bit lazy to do it this way butmathematicians are a bit lazy and love
doing this because it captures theintuition perfectly and in the end can
be justified in a rigorous way. Anywayjust add dx and dy to the coordinates of
our first point to get the coordinatesof our second point. Now, of course, these
displacements are not independent ofeach other. The connection is most easily
established in terms of the derivatives ofthe coordinate functions. So the
derivative of the x coordinate withrespect to the parameter t is dx/dt
which I write at x'(t) andsimilarly for the y coordinate function.
Solving for dx and dy gives this and thisthen links both dx and dy to an
increment dt of the parameter t that'schanging, right?Now we substitute like this and now we're ready to calculatethe area of our infinitesimal triangle as before.1/2 times a cross. And this evaluates to
this expression here. And this we canwrite in a slightly more compact form
like that. Okay now what we have to do isto add all these infinitely many
infinitesimal areas and as usual incalculus this is done with one of those
magical integrals. The little circletwirling in the counterclockwise
directionsays that we're supposed to integrate
around the curve exactly once in thecounterclockwise direction.
Well let's see: for our deltoid we havethis parameterization here. We've already
seen that a full trace is accomplished byhaving t run from 0
 to 2 pi. This means that in thisspecial case our integral can be written
like this. Now evaluating and simplifyingthe expression in the brackets gives
this integral here, which can be brokenup into two parts. Maths students won't be
surprised that the trig(onometric)  integral on theright evaluates to 0 which then means
that the area where after is equal to thisbaby integral which of course is equal
to 2 pi. Now the little rolling circlethat is used to produce our deltoid is of
radius 1 and is therefore of area pi.This means that the area of the deltoid
is exactly double the area of therolling circle. Neat isn't it? Okay, up for a couple ofchallenges? Then explain in the comments
what the number stands for that theshoeless formula or the integral formula
produce in the case of self intersectingcurves like these here. Another thing worth
pondering is how the argument for ourtriangle formula has to be adapted to
account for the blue points ending up indifferent quadrants, for example, like
this. And that's it for today. I hope youenjoyed this video and as usual let me
know how well these explanations workedfor you. Actually since I mentioned the Kakeya video and fish,I did end up turning my Kakeya fish
into a t-shirt. What do you think? Welland that's really it for today.