If you've been following the nerdy end of the news you will have seen headlines this week along the lines of"Scientists discover new shape!" Now th¡ªw¡ªhang onwho were these scientists discovering a new shape? What d'you mean by new shape?Are any mathematicians involved and obviously I wasn't the only person wondering this becausepeople start to email me and send me messages saying "Matt, can you explainwhat this new shape the scu-toid or SQ-toid is?" and I was likeYou know what? I want to find out. The problem is I'm currently travelling throughI don't know, generic foreign cities somewhere in the world because I'm doing shows for high school students. Details below.So, to be able to explore this shape and see what it is and how it behaves and if it is indeednew, it's time for another installment in everyone's favorite stand-up math segmentMatt makes a shape out of things he found around the place he's stayingwhile on holidays. Let's do itWelcome to the ratherechoey dining room of my Airbnb.It's furnished with all the most generic decor that IKEA has to offer and a lot of their walls.So anyway, I've got some cardboard I found around the house. I've got all the Australian staplesThere's BBQ Shapes and Little Creatures Pale Ale.Thankfully, I've got tape with me and I found a pair ofscissors and I was able to locate some pipe cleaners.Now the scutoid is a member of the wider family ofprism or prismatoidshapes. So, before we get into the scutoid itself, we're gonna start with shape number 0: the prism.I've now got a collection of pentagons that I've cut out of shapes and I've got hexagons from Little Creatures. Now, aprism is just when you've got two identicalparallel faces and you join up all of the vertices. So I'm going to use the pipe cleaners to do that.Okay, and there we go. There's mypentagonal prism and my hexagonal prism. Now, of course, these faces should be filled inrectangles. I've just done the edges and left these empty,but they should be filled in the same way that the ends are filled in and these your standard-issueprisms. Nothing that exciting yet.However,that's not the only option for making a prism if we actually take our pentagonal prism and give it a twist,I can sneak a few more edges in there.So our original prism here had hexagonal faces and then all these faces joining them arerectangles.Because of the twists, I've now got in twice as many edges going around and twoedges meet at each vertex. I mean, plus the, you know, edges on the top.And so what I've got here is an antiprism. If your two parallel identical facesline up and you're using rectangles as a prism, hexagonal prism. If things are skewed and you use triangles,antiprism. So that's now shape number one in the prism family: the antiprism.Slight detour off the prismatoid path to a pyramid. It's a, you know, hexagon basedpyramid. This is not a prismatoid because it hasn't got a pair of parallel faces anywhere. But you could imagine,like if you sliced off the top and put a new face in there, it would be parallel to the bottom one.That's exactly what I've made here. So this is a frustum. That's shapenumber two: the frustum. This is what happens if you get apyramid-like shape and you lop the top off. It works with cones as well. You get a frustum shapeIt is a prismatoid. It's yet anothervariation on the thing. So now we have the prism, the antiprism, and the frustum. One more to go.Okay, so what I've done now is I've put a Pentagon on the top and a hexagon on the bottom.But to join them together,well there's more vertices at the bottom than the topso two of the edges,which I've done in yellow here, have to meet.And so this bit here, to patch the six vertices at the bottom to the five on the topI've used an antiprism triangle here whereas the rest of it is prism rectangles.Now in maths, there's not a special name for this. This is just back to the generic name prismatoid, right?It's got the parallel faces all the ones in between have four or three edges around them.It's a prismatoid. But it's some combination of, it's a bit prism-y me in some bits,it's a bit antiprism-y in others. It's a mix of the two. Doesn't get a special name.So I guess our final category is justprismatoid, which is kind of everything else. But now,there's one more.So this is it! This is ourscu-toid or es-cu-toid. It is the same with our generic prismatoid before, but instead of the antiprismtriangle face all the way out, you've got like a Y. So you've got a little triangle face and then over hereyou've just got your standard single edge coming into the top. So you could saya scutoid is aprismatoid at one end and then it's a prism at the other.prism and asingle triangle prismatoidThough, there you are. I mean, that's-- that's it.I guess the most important bit is this bit here where it merges. A little like Y or V shapes. So in short,there'spentagons to the left of V,hexagons to the right. Here, Y amstuck in the middlewith scu-toid.Hey, that's pretty good.That's so good, I'm taking five minutes off.ahhActually, while I am taking a break, earlier on todayI had a chat with my friend Laura Taalman who was working out how to 3D print one of these.Which is not easy, because these faces no longer all flatyou've got this concave bit here. This weird kind of 5 edgedface is no longer well behaved and so 3D printing that is not trivial. Andwe'll get to in a moment, these things are meant to kind of stack together.So I asked, basically, I asked Laura how she went about designing a 3D model for these.So when I first tried to make the scutoid, I did sort of the most boneheaded thing you can do which is just to putvertices in the shape of a hexagon,and then below it in the shape of a pentagon, and then have an extra vertex, and take the convex hull of all those vertices.That didn't work. Some of the sides have to be curvy.They're not actually planar faces. The scutoid isn't a polyhedron. The next thing I did after that is Idivided the object vertically into slices and kind of lofted a slice at a timeso each slice was not curved but then it approximatedthis nice curved surface going up. And then, I did get an object that was nice and curvy and looked like a scutoid thatlooked pretty much just like the scutoid that's in the picture in the article. However, it didn't pack with itself.It turns out that the locations of the vertices and, in particular, the location of the extra vertexare really key for determining whether a scutoid will pack with itself.But there's ways that you can constrain it to make that happenand the final model does have this property that it packs with itself. I was doing all this in OpenSCAD.You can delete that if that's not interesting, but I was. I did this an OpenSCAD.So what does a scutoid have to do with packing and biology? Well, there are cells in biology calledepithelium cells and they form an epithelium layer and biologists just always assumed that they would be prismsthat have f-- well, obviously distorted prisms. The cells would grow and fill the space and just, you knowhave a face at each end of be joined up normally in the middle and whenever there was some kind of curvature orthe surface was distorted then it's a frustum. It's a truncated pyramid arrangement.But then, biologists spotted patterns and curvature in these layers of cells which couldn't be explained by truncated pyramidshaped cells. And so they got some mathematicians involved. Yeah, thank goodnessThere were some mathematicians involvedonce the biologists saw these strange shapes, some mathematicians came in and they thought wellhow would we modelwhat shape these cells would form if they were packed into these various arrangements? And they used, well, avariation on a thing called the Voronoi Techniquewhich is where you put a bunch of points in spaceand then you expand them until they fill all the space and each region around each point are all the other points which areclosest to thatoriginal starting seed point. And then they looked at, in the 3Darrangement, how these cells would form if they were trying to like minimize the energy, but find a stablearrangement where they pack together as efficiently as possible? And that is where they came up with the scutoid.The mathematicians predicted that theseepithelium cells would have a different number of edges on one face compared to the other face and the edges would mergesomewhere in the middle giving this prismatoid arrangement.I was actually lucky enough to talk to one of the mathematicians involved in the project, because I knew they were in there.So, I had a chat with Clara Grimaand she explained a bit more about how they found this shape based on what the biologist told them.Hey Matt, this has been the first time for methat we work together with biologists, physicists, and computer scientistsand I think that the role of everyone was quite important.In short, we themathematicians had to formalise how to define the new shape thatbiologists had observed in the microscope. The group leaded byLuis M. Escudero,biologists had discovered that the usual representation of cells or the epithelial tissuesprisms ortruncated pyramids could not explain some properties that they observed in the microscope.So they ask us to try to find the correct model.With our first model wemade some predictions,but they will not stillaccurate. So, we have to change our model and finally with the scutoideverything worked fine.Finally, we have the seal of approval of physicists and he proved that thescutoids are stable whenthey pack together.The mathematics didn't predict that all epithelium cells would be scutoids just enough to give you the right curvature.So for the case of a cylinder, which happens in animals apparently, or some kind of spheroid, you would have a certainpercentage of these and it's quite nice that it's built out of pipe cleaners because it's not some fixed rigid shape, right?But it's not, it's not like a cube or something like that but nor is it quite topology because there is some geometry.It's somewhere between topology and geometry. They worked out the structurethat would be required in some cells to give these sorts of shapes and then they found it. They looked in fruit flies.They took what the mathematicians told them and the biologists were actually able to find these shapes insidelittle creatures. It's ap--a phenomenal collaboration between biology and mathematics. There may be applications as well.I was chatting to Clara and she said that one dayif they look at tissue actually in, let's say, humans and they know what structure toexpect, they can tell if the cells are growing normally or not. Or if we ever make artificial cells,we need to know what kind of structure they form. So at the moment, it's all very abstract. It's all very exciting.You can read the full nature paper if you want. I'll put a link to it below.It's publicly available. One last bombshell that Clara told me when we were talking is that this shape herewhich gives it the name scutoid in the media. Officially, it's because of a beetle, right?It's named after a very similar shape you will see in beetles.Biologists! But when I was chatting to her, it turns out that was not theoriginal reason for the name scutoid.This is funny and cute for meOfficially, it's because part of the body of a beetle is very similar to our shape the scutoid.okay, but there is a hidden reason and I will tell you secret.The biologist leader of the project is called EscuderoTranslated to Latin is "escudo". So from "escudo" as a joke, we start to call itescu-toidsLater, we cannot think another name for our shape, but scutoid. Bye Matt,May the scutoid be with you. Thanks so much for watching the video.There are more videos of me building things that are stuffI find while traveling. You can subscribe to my channel for all your mathematical needs and thank you so much to all my patreon supporterswho make these videos possible. If you come across more maths in the news or something interesting, drop me an email.I'll see if I can make a video about itand finally the shows for high school students I was doing in Sydney are overover but I do them all the time right across the UK and we'll be in New York for the first time in October.Details below.