On those cold, rainy days when you forget
your rain jacket or umbrella and you wantto stay as dry as possible¡­ should you walk
and spend more time in the rain? Or shouldyou run, which means you'll be smashing into
more raindrops from the side?Assuming you haven't been fully soaked yet
and you aren't jumping into puddles, the answeris simple. As you move out of the way of one
falling raindrop, you move into the way ofanother. So the amount of rain hitting the
top of you is constant, regardless of howfast you're going. Alternatively, you can
picture that the raindrops themselves arestationary and you (and the earth beneath
you) are moving upwards through the rain!And since the volume of a parallelepiped (that's
a 3D parallelogram) doesn't depend at allon its slant, then no matter how fast you're
moving horizontally the same amount of rainwill land on top of you each second.Now, if you're not moving, the rain from the
top is all you'll get. But if you ARE moving,you'll also run into raindrops from the side
and you'll get wetter. So in any given second,you stay driest by standing still, and the
faster you move the wetter you become.But if you're trying to get from point A to
point B, then standing still won't do youmuch good. And en route from point A to point
B, the total amount of rain you run into fromthe side has nothing to do with how fast you're
going - just like how a snowplow will plowthe same amount of snow from a stretch of
road regardless of the exact speed it drives.In the case of running through the rain, you
can figure that out using parallelepipedsagain.So over a given period of time, the same amount
of rain will hit you from the top, regardlessof how fast you're going. And over a given
distance, you'll hit the same amount of rainfrom the side - again, regardless of how fast
you're going.So your total wetness is equal to the wetness
per second for rain from the top times theamount of time you spend in the rain, plus
the wetness per meter for rain from the sidetimes the number of meters you travel.So to stay driest getting from one point to
another, you should try to minimize the amountof water falling onto you from above. And
quite simply, that means getting out of therain as fast as possible.