Welcome to another Mathologer video.To make sense of transcendental numbers isconsidered to be very tough and noYouTube video or other attempt atpopularization I know of even gets closeto a really convincing argument thatsome particular number is transcendental,let alone anything beyond that. Today'svideo is my best shot at giving anintroduction to transcendental numbersthat is both in depth and at the sametime accessible to anybody with a bit ofcommon sense. This introduction will bepowered by the remarkably simpleconstructions at the core the theory ofinfinite sets developed by a greatmathematician Georg Cantor. Now theexperts among you will probably be familiarwith some of these constructions but I'mpretty sure that even for you there willbe a couple of pleasant plot twists thatyou won't see coming. So stick around and,please, at the end let me know what workedfor you and what didn't. Okay quick introto transcendental numbers and why wecare about them. Here we go. When I talkabout numbers in this video in the firstinstance I mean the real numbers and asusual I'll often represent the standardset of numbers by the number line. Tostart with there are the integers and therational numbers, the numbers that can beexpressed as fractions of integers. Infact, for a long time people believe thatall numbers are rational and it'sactually quite natural to do so. Justthink about it, here the numbers that aremultiples of 1/2, here the ones thatare multiples of 1/4, here the onesto the multiples of 1/8, and so on. Thesenumbers get as narrowly spaced as youwish and so it's pretty easy to see thatno matter how tiny an interval I pick onthe number line there will always beinfinitely many rational numberscontained in it. And so to start with there isreally no reason to suspect that thereexist irrational numbers, numbers thatcannot be written as fractions. But ofcourse you probably all know that root 2and the golden ratio are irrationalnumbers. These two irrationals as well asthe fractions areexamples of algebraic numbers. Those arethe numbers that come up naturally inalgebra as solutions to polynomialequations with integer coefficients. Forexample, the fraction 22 over 7 is thesolution to this linear equation thereand root 2 is one of the two solutionsof this quadratic equation. I justrandomly picked the polynomial equation atthe bottom. It's got one realsolution which is approximately minusone point zero six one, and so on. Thealgebraic numbers have a number ofamazing properties. For example, just likethe real numbers themselves andthe rational numbers they form an algebraicstructure called a field. Also ALL numberswithout exception that can be written asradical expressions by combiningintegers using plus minus, times, divided androots like these are algebraic. On theother hand, the algebraic numbers thatcannot be written as such rootyexpressions. That the algebraic numbershave these properties is really quitemiraculous and not obvious at all,definitely worth one or two separatevideos I think. In any case, a verynatural question to ask is whether thereare any numbers that are not algebraic, inother words whether there aretranscendental numbers, numbers thattranscend the world generated by algebra.Okay, let's warm up with a truly ingeniousconstruction of an irrational number anumber that cannot be written as afraction using some of Cantor'sideas. I start with this grid here whichis made up of all possible pairs ofintegers. From here we get all thefractions like this. Well, apart from thereal fractions you also get somenonsense fractions with zeros inthe denominators. Now we'll do somethingwhich at first glance may seemimpossible, we make up a list thatcontains every rational number exactly once.Cantor's ingenious trick that makesthis possible is to simply walk alongthis spiral here. Right so we go and notedown each rational number the first timewe come across it.So start with 0/0. That's not a number, solet's move on. 0 divided by 1,that's 0 which makes 0 the firstrational number on our list. Next comes1/1 so 1 is the second number on ourlist. Forget about 1/0. Next is - 1here and then there's zero, but wealready listed 0 so we move on to-1/-1that's one which we've also got already.Now skipping ahead, the next number wehave not seen yet is -1/2. Okaythen 1/2, then 2, and so on. Let'swrite down all the rational numbers indecimals. You all know that some numbershave two decimal expansions, one endingin a tail of zeros and the other in atale of 9s. For example, the number1can also be written as 0.999...and so on. Actually it seems thatthe vast majority of people watchingYouTube are not familiar with the factthat 1=0.9999...and that the majority of thosewho are aware of this basic fact arereally violently opposed to it. If youdon't believe me or even if you do, for areal eye-opener, I recommend browsingthrough some of the five thousandcomments on my 1=0.9999...video aimed at primary school kids.Anyway whenever there is a choicebetween two different decimal expansionsfor one of the numbers on our list we willuse the decimal expansion thatterminates in zeros. Now highlight thisinfinite diagonal of digits here.Alright, using this diagonal we canstraightaway write down a number thatis irrational. So we make a copy of thediagonal for this and change all thedigits in the circles. Here we change allthe 0s to 1s and all the otherdigits to 0s. The new number that weget this way differs from every numberon our list in one position each. Forexample, it differs fromthe sixth number on the list in the sixth digithere. It differs from thefifth number in the fifth digit and soon and this means that the new number isreally different from all the numberswe've listed, right? But we've listed allrational numbers and therefore the newnumber has to be irrational. The factthat made this neat constructionpossible was that the rational numberscan be listed like this. Infinite sets ofnumbers that can be listed like this arecalled countably infinite. As part ofsuch an infinite list we enumerate theelements of the countably infinite setwith natural numbers. This also showsthat in a sense they are exactly as manynatural numbers as they are elements inany countably infinite set. Just thinkabout this for a moment: a listing like thisshows that there are as many rationalnumbers as natural numbers! Now if yousee this for the first time, don't youthink that this is really amazing. Anywayif you give me any countably infinite(listable) set then I can make up anumber outside this set using Cantordiagonalization which is what our niftyconstruction method is often called.And the thing is, and I'll show you in asecond, the algebraic numbers are justlike the rational numbers countablyinfinite. This means party time, you canuse Cantor diagonalization to constructa number that is not algebraic, a numberthat is transcendental. A very importantingredient in listing the algebraicnumbers is the fact that a quadraticequation can have at most two solutionsand a degree 21 equation like the one atthe bottom there can have at most 21real solution. Okay, here thenis a quick sketch of how you can listthe algebraic numbers. We've alreadylisted the fractions, that is, thesolutions to all linear equations withinteger coefficients A B. Now don't gethung up too much on the details of mymethod of listing the algebraic numbers.What I do here is pretty arbitrary andthere arelots and lots of different ways oflisting the algebraic numbers.In fact, it's not very hard to make upyour own method if your life should everdepend on it, you know, might happen :) Okay,after we've listed the rational numberswe'll list the quadratic irrational andthese are the solutions of quadraticequations with three integer coefficientsA, B and C now.  Just like wesystematically inspected the 2d grid hereof all integer pairs from the inside outto cycle through all fractions, we canuse a 3d grid of all integer triples A, B, C.to cycle through all possible quadraticequations. Okay, for every quadraticequation that we come across in thisway we add those among its solutions to ournew list that are neither fractions andtherefore already part of the first listthere nor quadratically rationals thatwe've already seen in this secondprocess. And in this way, we list all thequadratic irrationals, including root 2and the golden ratio, for example. Okaynow we repeat this process for allcubic irrationals and so on. Now wecompact all this all together and nowthis 2d grid contains every algebraicnumber exactly once. So now we've got afinal nifty trick. We string up this gridlike this and simply list the algebraicnumbers as we come across them whilewalking along the blue path. As I saidthis is just one way to list the algebraicnumbers, there are infinitely many others.Cantor diagonalization translates theone i've chosen into a transcendentalnumber that starts out like this. Nowpinpointing this transcendental numberis not the end of the usefulness ofCantor's diagonalization trick. We canalso use it to figure out how manytranscendental numbers there are. AgainCantor's diagonalization trick lets us finda real number outside any countablyinfinite set of numbers. What about thereal numbers themselves? Are the realnumbers are also a countably infinitesense? Well obviously not because if theywere countable diagonalization wouldproduce a real numberoutside the set of real numbers. Wellthat's obviously not possible. That would really be atranscendental number. Anyway it is notpossible to construct a real numberoutside the real numbers and so sincethis is not possible this means that thereal numbers cannot be listed that theyform an uncountably infinite set. Welllet's have that sink in for a second.Uncountably infinite, that's obviously alarger infinity than countably infinity,right? Okay, so the real numbers areuncountably infinite and the algebraicnumbers are countably infinite. Whatabout the transcendental numbers? Are theycountably infinite or uncountablyinfinite? Well since the transcendentalnumbers complement the countablyinfinite set of algebraic numbers to theuncountably infinite set of real numbersit should be uncountably infinite itself,right? And here is actually chance for youto show this in the comments just basedon what I've said so far. See how you gowith this. Anyway, let me show yousomething stronger. I want to show youthat a countably infinite set of numberslike the rational numbers or thealgebraic numbers are vanishingly smallwhen compared to an uncountably infiniteset like the real numbers, thetranscendental numbers or the irrationalnumbers. Here is a nice argument thatillustrates it in the case of therational numbers. Okay, so what I'll do isI'll label the rational numbers with thenatural numbers using our list there. Sothe rational number 0 gets labeled witha 1. Next 1 gets labeled with a 2and so on. Take a segment of length 1,half it and put it on the number linecentered at the number labeled 1. Halfthe remaining interval and put it on thenumber line centered at the number labelled2, and so on.So what we've done is to encase therational numbers into a set of length 1.This means, and this is made rigorous in abranch of math called measure theory thatthe set of rationals has length ormeasure less than 1. But then the wholeconstruction still works if we start outwith any shorter segments and chop it up.And now since we can make these segmentsarbitrarily small the conclusion is thatthe rationals have length or measure 0.So in a sense they are not even there,although you think they're there :) Well ofcourse the same is true for any othercountably infinite set of numbers likethe algebraic numbers. Every countablyinfinite set of numbers has measure 0, 0length. That's a pretty strangeconclusion isn't it but when you thinkabout it not any stranger than some ofthe other things we've seen so far likethat the set of algebraic numbers is nolarger than the set of natural numbers.What all this also implies is that if weshould restrict our attention to somefinite interval and pick a random numberinside this interval, in a paradoxicalbut very precise sense you have a zerochance of picking any algebraic numberor, what's saying the same, you can bepretty certain to have picked atranscendental number. So, what aboutnumbers like pi or e. Well since almostall numbers are transcendental you wouldexpect both pi and e to betranscendental. And that's actually truebut it turns out to be super tough toprove this and it's really beyond what Ican do in a video like this. But just forfun here's such a proof, there is fourpages of super dense mathematical pain :)Okay, now here I just have to mentionthat proving in 1882 that pi istranscendental resolved a problem thatalready puzzled the ancient Greeks.Pi being transcendental implies thatsquaring the circle is impossible. Sogiven a circle it is impossible toconstruct a square of the same area justusing an ideal mathematicalruler and compass. Anyway since even getting closeto proofs for the transcendence of pi, eor any other number we are obsessingover is really out of reach, what's thenext best thing we can aim for? Okay, wellthe dots in the transcendental number Imade up for you are the same sort ofdots as in  3.1415926535and so onThese dots only make sense in context. Onthe other hand, it would be great to beable to display a decimal number with asimple pattern of digits and show thatthis number is transcendental. Liouville'sconstant, discovered by the great Frenchmathematician Joseph Liouville justpreceding Cantor's ideas fits the bill.This number is really an ocean of zeroswith isolated islands of 1s at the 1! th2! th, 3! thetc. digits. Since this number featuresstrings of zeros of arbitrary length, itclearly does not have a repeating tailand is therefore an irrational number. Itis one of the earliest numbers that wasproven to be transcendental and intextbooks it is usually portrayed as thetranscendental number whosetranscendence is easiest to prove. Havingsaid that I think the way to pinpoint aspecific transcendental number and proveits transcendence that are showed youin this video is definitely much easierto explain and understand than any ofthe proofs of the transcendence ofLiouville's  is constant that I've seen.Having said that the original main aimof this video was to come up with a niceyoutubable proof for the transcendenceof the Liouville constant. I actually managedto put together such a proof but Ireally think it deserves its own videosometime. And so this is it for today.I hope you enjoyed this video and as usual letme know in the comments what did andwhat did not work for you.