Here we are given a parabola with the
vertex at negative 1 and 4. Vertex. Thequestion explicitly tells us the
information for the vertex, that means weshould use the vertex form to model this
parabola, right. Makes sense? Yeah. Solet's use the vertex form to model this
parabola. Okay? Let's go. So vertex formgoes something like this, right, with y on
the left side of the equation, x on theright side of the equation with the square
right here meaning we are dealing with aquadratic function, right, cool. And the a
here is the leading coefficient for theparabola, okay? Cool. Now, vertex. So this
vertex information should be able to tellus the information about something here,
and something here, right? So let's go.For this vertex the x coordinate is
negative 1. So if you want to make thestatement look something like this, with a
bracket and the x inside, we are lookingfor a value here, right? Would you say
that means we have to move the number tothe same side as x, and we can put a
bracket around the statement, right? Solet's do this. Now, negative 1 is moved to
the other side of the equation, it becomespositive 1, right? And now the rest of the
equation we just have zero, and now we canput a bracket around this whole thing. And
that is gonna be the information we aregonna put down here, right, yeah.
So inside the bracket what do we see? Xplus 1. So inside the bracket, we just put
down x plus 1. And that's done, okay? Sothe x portion is done. Now let's take care
of the y portion. So for the vertex, the ycoordinate is 4. Let's do the same thing,
move the number to the same side as y. Sopositive 4 moved to the other side becomes
negative 4, and this side of the equationwe just have zero. And now, we can put a
bracket around this, right. And now we canput this whole thing right here. So inside
the bracket we have y minus 4. Inside thebracket we have y minus 4. And now this
portion of the equation is done. So nowhow do you determine the value for the
leading coefficient? Well there's stillone information we haven't used, so
chances are this will help us find aleading coefficient: the information about
this point. So let's go.What does this point tell us? What
information can we get out of this point?Well, this point is basically telling us
that for this quadratic function, when xequals negative 3, the corresponding y
value is 12. And guess what? These othervalues will plug into the equation to find
the leading coefficient. Okay? So here, xvalue, we're going to plug in negative 3.
Here, the y value, we're gonna plug in 12.Okay guys? And let's try to solve for a.
So left side of the equation we have 12minus 4, we get-- let me use another
color. So, left side of the equation wehave 12 minus 4 we get 8 .equals, a is the
value we are trying to find. Now, thisside we have negative 3 plus 1, we have
negative 2. And don't forget outside wegotta have a square, right. Cool. Now, a
equals negative 2 squared. Guys, negative2 squared we get positive, right. Positive
of what, 2 squared is 4. So we have 4a.Okay guys. Now, to solve the value for a,
to solve the value for a, we simply divideboth sides of the equation by 4. That way
4, 4 cancels out. So at the end, a equals8 divided by 4 is 2. That's it, that's the
value for a right here. Okay, guys? So atthe end, for this parabola, the quadratic
function is right here, okay? Left side ofthe equation we have y minus 4 equals. . .
Guys, what's the value for a right here? Ais 2, right? So a is 2. So we put it in
right here. Now bracket, inside thebracket we have x plus 1. And don't for
get about the square to show that this isa quadratic function, right. Now, to fully
write this as a vertex form, we simplyhave to move the constant to the other
side of the equation, right?So the vertex form is y equals 2 bracket
square, inside the bracket x plus 1. Andnow move negative 4 to the other side of
the equation we have positive 4. Andthere, we have a beautiful equation in
vertex form. Okay? That's it. So now, nowthat you know how to work with this,
right, next time, you can actually do thisquestion a lot faster. You can just go
like this. What color should I use? Let'suse blue. Okay.
Check this out. Next time, you canapproach this conclusion a lot faster if
you do this. Check this out. For thevertex, the x value is negative 1. Now, if
you want to put this value inside thebracket, for x, negative 1, remember you
have to go opposite, negative when you putit inside the bracket you go positive,
okay? So the value is 1. Negative 1, goopposite, inside the bracket, positive 1.
Now, the same thing works for y. Checkthis out. For y here, for the vertex, the
y value is 4. Postive 4. Now go oppositeremember you have to go opposite when you
put a value inside the bracket. Sopositive4, if you put a value inside the
bracket, you got to go negative. Sopositive 4, if you put it inside the
bracket, you've got to put negative 4..It's a lot faster, right? Saved you a
couple of seconds right there. Okay? Yeah.Cool.