Times tables using hands by TecMathIn this video we are going to be  having a look at how you can   use your hands to work out some  of the times tables  the times tables involving and these numbers only the sixes,sevens,eights,nines and tens.  It's a good method especially for guys first working out their for guys first working out their times tables who tend to be  struggling a bit.  I got my kids doing a few of thesemainly because they struggling  with a few of the ones like 7 x 8    and ones like this    and this is a trick just for   those guys who need an extra little bit of help or for anyone who is interested  in cool maths tricks like meOK, this is the way this works,  we have our left hand here, and we've got our right hand here  and we've got our thumbs   pointing inwards here as you can see I haven't   used my own hands  my own hands are far to hideous  for that.  So what we do is we number our fingers from our thumbs   outwards, our fingers,   so we start with a six,a seven, an eight, a nine that's a nine, and a ten.  And this one also -- a six,a seven, an eight, a nine anda ten.  The way this works is like thisWhat you do -- say we have a question such as let'sthink of one here,  we'll go a nice easy one six times eight.  Six times eight,  the way this works is thiswe have our six here  and our eight here.  You would touch these two fingers together if we were to do this  what we would do is we  would have these two fingers  touching one anotherand you can probablyimagine that, and when we do that we're going to end up with all of these fingers in a group  together, so we end up with our six and our eight and we end up with all of these fingers on one side,  and all of these fingers on theoutside of this --that's these fingers here.  The way we get our answer the first part of our answer we just add all of these fingers on the inside part--the fingers closest to us together including the ones that are touching, so one,two,three, fourWith the other fingers what we have, is we have four over here: one, two, three, four,and we have two over here:one, two -- and we times these two numbers togetherfour times two is eight.That's our answer forty eight.Wait a second -- 2.42 -2.44surely that doesn't work for all of them I hear you say so we'll have a look at a few more of them. So,  the question I'm going  to do now is a different one, say, nine times eight.  OK, now how do we work out this -- we would stick the nine finger and the eight finger together I want you to give this a go.  Hopefully you've written thenumbers on your hand andyou do this right now.  We get the nine finger here I'll colour this in red becausered tends to show up a lotnicer, so this nine finger here and this eight finger here. So we group all of these fingers together we have one,two three, four,five six,sevenseven fingers that are going to be pointing closest to you, including the pointers.Seven.  Over here we have one, over here we have two and we multiply these one times two is two.  Pretty cool right?OK -- I'll give one last exampleof these, what about another one in fact I said one before one my son tended to strugglewith a lot which was this oneseven times eight.  So we get seven times eighthere's the seven, here's theeight, put those fingers together.The ones that are closest towards you including that particularone are going to encompass all of these fingers  we haveone, two, three, four, five.  Over here we have three fingers on the outer over here we have two fingerson the outer.Three times two is six, the answer is fifty six.  It's a pretty cool trick right?  Anyway, hopefully you've got   the swing of those it's a really really great trick, especially for those guys who are struggling with theirtimes tables, and so I hope4.you found that really handy.Remember you permanently have to keep those numbers written on your fingers in fact, I recommend get a tattoo get them tattooed on yourfingers then you'll never need to carry a calculator ever again.Hopefully that was some help. See you.