BAM!!! Mr. Tarrou We are starting one of my favorite topics which is trigonometry. Thestudy of triangles and their rotations around
a circle. This is used in engineering, measurementsof real life items that are too big to do
with a ruler and a straight edge and stufflike that. It has to do a lot with mathematics
of rotation and spheres. We live on a globe.A lot of mechanical items have tons of spinning
items in them, just think of an engine witha spinning crank shaft. So trig is very important
in later studies of mathematics and engineering.Let's get started with a very basic idea and
some definitions. We are going to introducestandard position angles and try to in probably
a two part video explain what radian measuresare...that is another way of measuring rotation
besides degrees. A standard position anglehas a vertex on the origin and it's initial
side on the positive side of the x axis. Soif I wanted to start drawing a standard position
angle, I would start off by putting the vertexon the origin and initial side on the positive
x axis. Now the terminal side is the onlypart that is allowed to move in a standard
position angle. So if you wanted to draw a45 degree angle...BAM!! This is the terminal
side. Well that is fine but that is an incompletepicture. This is because one of the other
definitions I have to talk about is coterminalangles. Those are angles that have a measurement,
two angles that have measurements that areseparated by a full rotation of either 360
degrees or 2pi radians. You might not knowwhat that means yet (radians), but hopefully
by the end of this video you will. Ok, sowe have an initial side, a terminal side,
now I need to add an extra part to this diagramto indicate what direction the rotation is
and how much rotation there is. So I am goingto draw a little arc that is going to indicate
counter clockwise rotation and i did say thatwe were drawing a 45 degree angle. Well what
if I wanted to draw a negative 45 degree angle?What would that negative rotation look like?
So I am going to draw another angle on thisexact same picture. Well all angles in standard
position have their vertex on the origin,they all share the same initial side, so there
that is the first part of my new angle I amdrawing. But, now I want to rotate negative
45 degrees. Well positive rotation is counterclockwise from the positive side of the x
axis, the initial side, and so I think youmight guess what negative 45 degrees is...that
is clockwise rotation. Again from the positiveside of the x axis, so something like that.
So there we have an initial and terminal side.We have another initial and terminal side
of the negative 45 degree angle. Ok, so thereyou go! All drawings of standard position
angles have a vertex on the origin, positiveside of the x axis, rotate counter clockwise
for positive rotation and clockwise for negativerotation. Now later on in this textbook and
in your class you are probably studying bearingquestions. You know how to read a compass?
Compass rotations, bearings, are going tobased off of due North so that might be a
little bit confusing for some of you whenwe get to those questions about bearing. But,
a standard position angle, all of those rotationsdo start off the positive side of the x axis.
These are not like navigation angles. Nowyou see I have got I, II, III, and IV up here.
This is just the coordinate plane. This isquadrant 1, this is quadrant ii, quadrant
iii, and quadrant IV. So our 45 degrees isin quadrant I and negative 45 degrees is in
quadrant IV. Now let's talk about this ideaof coterminal angles having angles separated
by full rotations of 360 degrees. I want todraw an angle that is coterminal to 45 degrees.
What is that going to look like? It is goingto be in standard position so it is going
to share the same initial side that ALL standardposition angles share the same initial side.
ALL of them have their vertex on the origin.So you know this does not say co-initial angle,
it says coterminal angle. Co-habitate, coexist,cooperate...work together or share...they
are sharing the same terminal side. That isthe big deal, that is the side that moves.
They ALL share the initial side in standardposition. So, an angle that is coterminal
to 45 degrees is going to look like a 45 degreeangle but that is not a complete picture.
Is that a 45 degree angle or is that an anglethat is coterminal to a 45 degree angle? We
don't know that without these little arcsto indicate direction of rotation and how
much. I need to rotate and additional fullrotation of 360 and I am going to show that
by doing this. Start at the positive sideof the x axis, rotate positively because I
want to do...I just decided to do a positiverotation, and I am going to rotate all the
way around until I get back to that same terminalside. Now how many degrees have I graphed
here? I have graphed a full 360 degrees plusan additional 45 degrees to make an angle
that is 360 plus 45 is 405 degrees. Now wecould also rotate in the opposite direction
as well. We could instead of adding 360 likeI have done, we could subtract 360 and that
will show an angle of rotation instead ofgoing counter clockwise, we would go clockwise.
But if I do any more arcs on this you willnot be able to read anything. We could do
45 minus 360 and get a negative, what wouldthat be negative 315 degrees. You can add
or subtract a full rotation and get a coterminalangle. I have one more definition up here
for you. It is a quadrantal angle. I havedrawn an angle in quadrant 1 and I have drawn
an angle in quadrant 4 with the negative rotation.If I draw an angle such as let's say 90 degrees,
if I rotate exactly 90 degrees I am landingthe terminal side on an axis line. I am not
actually in quadrant 2 and I am not in quadrant1, I am exactly in between, this angle is
not in a quadrant it is a quadrantal angle.Any angle with a measurement of 90 or an integer
multiple of 90 is going to be considered aquadrantal angle. It's terminal side is not
going to be in a quadrant at all. Ok, let'serase all of this and get on to the next topic
which is how to measure rotation with radiansand not degrees. We care about another way
measuring rotation because in certain areasof mathematics, where we are doing mathematics
where things are spinning a lot like engineering,if we are doing navigation around a globe
a round sphere, some mathematics can be doneeasier with radian measures instead of degrees.
Now let's talk about a full rotation of 360degrees. That is not too bad. We have a radius.
So we have a circle, I have rotated 360 degrees.Thus I have got a bottom heavy circle here.
So let's talk about a measure of rotationthat we are comfortable with which is degrees
and see if we can't convert it into the ideaof radians. For radians I want to talk about
this idea of pi. Every time you see the letterpi which stands for approximately 3.14, that
does not mean that automatically you havea radian measure. But pi of 3.14 does have
a lot to do with radians. Do you know where3.14 comes from? A lot of my students do not.
Well, if you take a circle such as we havehere only maybe yours is actually round:)
I am going to have this length of r and Iam going to try my best to estimate this length
and wrap it around my not so perfect circle.So maybe somewhere around here and that is
one length of the radius. And so we have onelength of that radius. Let's estimate that
the best we can again and say it is probablysomewhere around there and lay down another
length of the radius of this circle. Now weare at 2 radiuses. And then finally let's
do another length of the radius which is probablyabout there. Now we are at 3 radiuses. Where
are we on the circle? We are almost to theother side of the circle. So in a measure
of rotation that we are comfortable with whichis degrees, I have just about gotten to the
side of the circle...I have just about rotatedto 180 degrees. Now I am counting off the
radiuses and I am almost at that 180 degrees.What do you think is left in that little bit
of a gap? What value do you think is in thatlittle piece right there? That little piece
is approximately equal to .14 radiuses. So3.14 is the number of radiuses, or radii,
to get half way around a circle. Now you canalso say that pi 3.14 is the ratio of the
entire circumference with the diameter. 3.14diameters gets you all the way around the
circle, but all of our formulas are goingto be based off the radius and not the diameter.
So, I am going to say, and it is true, that3.14 is the number of radii to get you half
way around the circle. Half way around thecircle is 180 degrees, so 180 degrees is equal
to pi radians. Now where do think they gotthis idea, this name of radians from? Well
because it is measured and based of the radiuses.So radian is based off of the measure of the
radius of the circle, and so radians is foundby doing s over r. S stands for arc length
and dividing that by the length of the radius.So regardless of how big the circle is, there
is only one shape that is a perfect circle,so regardless of the size of that circle 3.14
radiuses is what it takes to get you halfway around the circle. Pi radians equals 180
degrees. Nice:D Ok, you also might note that1 radian gets you somewhere near the end of
quadrant 1. 2 radians gets you into quadrant2. 3 radians is still going to be in quadrant
2, almost getting you to 180 degrees. I amgetting close to running out of time so in
the next lesson we are going to look at convertingfrom degrees to radians and building up all
the angles around what you will know eventually...notin this video...but what you will know eventually
as the unit circle. That is hugely importantfor you to memorize in the rest of your studies
of Trig. I am Mr. Tarrou. I will be rightback:)