let's say you want to predict some
output value ygiven some input value x. For examplemaybe you want to predict your score on test
based on how many hours you sleep andhow many hours you studythe night before. To use a machine
learning approachwe first need some data. Let's say for the
last three testsyou recorded your number of hours studying, you number of hours sleeping,and your score on the test. We'll use the
programming language Pythonto store data in two-dimensional "numpy"
arrays. Now that we have some datawe're going to use it to train a model to
predict how well you'll doon your next test,based on how many hours you sleep and
how many hours you study. This is called asupervised regression problem.It's supervised because our examples
have inputsand outputs. It's a regression problem
because we're predicting your testscore, which is acontinuous output. If, we
were predicting your letter gradethis would be called a classification
problem and not a regression problem.There are an overwhelming number of
models within machine learninghere we're going to use a particularly
interesting onecalled an artificial neural network
these guys are loosely based on how theneurons in your brain workand had been particularly successful
recently at solving really bigand really hard problemsbefore we throw our data into the model we need to account for the differences inthe units of our data.Both of our inputs are on hours, but ouroutput is a test score, scaled between 0
and 100.Neural networks are smart, but not smart
enough to guess the units of our data.It's kinda like asking our model to
compare apples to orangeswhen most learning models really only
want to compare apples to apples.The solution is to scale our data, thus
our model will only see standardized units.Here we're going to take advantage of
the fact that all our data is positiveand simply divide by the maximum value
for each variableeffectively scaling a result between 0 and 1.Now we can build our neural net. We know
our network must have two inputs,and one output because these are the
dimensions of our data.We'll call or output layer y hat,
because it's an estimate of y,but not the same as y. Any layer
between our input and output layers is called ahidden layerrecently researchers have built networks
with many many many hidden layersthese are known as deep belief networks
giving rise to the term deep learninghere going to use one hidden layer with
three hidden unitsbut if we wanted to build a deep
neural network we would just stack a bunch of theselayers together.In neural net visuals, circles represent
neuronsand lines represent synapsesSynapses have a really simple job, they take a value from their input, multiply it by aspecific weightand output the result. Neurons are a
little more complicatedtheir job is to add together the output
from other synapsesand apply an activation function. Certain
activation functions allow neuralnets to model complexnonlinear patterns that simpler models
may miss. For our neural net we'll usesigmoid activation functions.Next we'll build out our neural net in Python