Hey, Vsauce. Michael here. And the iTunes store contains 28 million different songs.Last.fm carries 45 million songs and the
Gracenote database of artists, titles, andlabels contains 130 million different songs.
That's a lot. If you were to listen to allof the songs in the Gracenote database one
after the other in a giant playlist, it wouldtake you more than 1,200 years to complete.But since there are a finite number of tones
our ears can distinguish and because it onlytakes a few notes in common for two musical
ideas to sound similar, will we ever run outof new music?Will there ever be a day where every possible
brief little melody has been written and recordedand we are left with nothing new to make?A good rule of thumb might be to say that
if modern recording technology can't distinguishthe difference between two songs, well, neither
could we. So, let's begin there, with digitaldownloads, MP3's, CD's, and a calculation
made by Covered in Bees.Digital music is made out of "bits."
Lots and lots of bits. But each individual bitexists in one of two states: a "0" or a "1."Now, what this means in that for any given,
say, 5-minute-long audio file, the numberof possibilities, mathematically speaking,
is enormous, but mind-blowingly finite.A compact disk, which samples music at 44.1
kHz, is going to need about 211 million bitsto store one 5-minute song. And because a
bit can exist in two states, either a "0"or a "1," the number of possible different
ways to arrange those 211,000,000 bits is2 to the 211th million power.That value represents every single possible
different 5-minute-long audio file. But howbig is that number?
Well, let's put this in perspective.A single drop of water contains 6 sextillion
atoms. 6 sextillion is 22 digits long. That'sa long number. But the total number of atoms
that make up the entire earth is a numberthat is about 50 digits long. And estimations
of the total number of hydrogen atoms in ouruniverse is a number that is 80 digits long.But "2 to the 211 millionth power," the number
of possible, different 5-minute audio files, is a numberthat is 63 million digits long. It is a number
larger than we can even pretend to understand.It contains every possible CD quality 5-minute
audio file. Inside that amount is everythingfrom Beethoven's "5th" to Beck's "Loser" -
it even contains a 5 minute conversation youhad with your parents when you were 3 years old.
In fact, every one of them. It even containsevery possible conversation you didn't have
with your parents when you were 3 years old.But, it is finite, not infinite. It's cool
to think about, but it doesn't come very closeto answering the question of this video, which
is "how many possible different songs canwe create and hear the difference between?"So, for that, we're going to need to narrow
down our hunt.On Everything2, Ferrouslepidoptera made a
calculation that involved some assumptionsthat I think helped narrow the field down
in a really nice way.She took a look at the total number of possible
different melodies you could create withinone octave, containing any or all of the intervals
we divide octaves into. Of course, sound frequenciescan be divided much more granularly than that,
but giving ourselves more notes might meanwe could make more technically different melodies,
but they wouldn't necessarily sound any differentto our ears.Now, given a single measure containing any
combination of whole, half, quarter, eighth,sixteenth or thirty-second notes, she calculated
that there would be this many possible uniquemeasures, which is a smaller number than we
had before, but, to put it in perspective,this is how many seconds old the universe is.Yerricde's calculation is even more specific.
He stayed within one octave, but instead oflooking at a complete measure, he only considered
the number of unique combinations of 8 notes.He also assumed that typical melodies, as
we know them today, only contain about threedifferent types of note length. For instance, quarter, eighth and sixteenth or whole,half and quarter.To be sure, that will most likely not always
be true. Musical tastes hundreds, thousandsof years from now will most assuredly be different,
but given melodies as we know them today,across 8 notes, over 12 intervals, there are
about 79 billion possible combinations.We're getting relatively small here. I mean,
under this definition of melody, 100 songwriterscreating a brand new 8-note melody every second
would exhaust every possible melody withinonly 248 years.But it's still a huge number, way bigger than
the total number of songs that have been writtenthat we know about. So, you can quite safely
say that, no, we will never run out of newmusic. But here's the rub. If that's the case,
why are there so many commonalities betweensongs? Even across hundreds of years, how
come so many songs kind of sound the same?I mean, if we have more possibilities than
we could ever exhaust, why is "Twinkle TwinkleLittle Star," the "Alphabet Song," and "Baa,
Baa, Black Sheep," all the same melody?"My Country Tis of Thee," and "God Save the
Queen," interestingly enough, are the samesong."Love Me Tender," is exactly the same as the
old American Civil War song "Aura Lea."And a seemingly uncountable number of songs
merely sound like other songs. The SpongebobSquarepants theme has a very similar cadence
to "Blow the Man Down."Soundsjustlike.com is a great resource for
exploring this further. It'll show you twosongs and how they sort of sound alike.And when it comes to musical chords,
it's almost as if there's no variety at all, aswas famously shown by The Axis of Awesome's
"4 Chords." I've linked it in the description,it's worth a watch if you haven't seen it
already. These guys sing more than 40 differentsongs using the same four chords...Even though the number of possible different
melodies is gigantic, us humans tend to gravitatetowards certain patterns that we like more
than others and we are influenced by whatcame before us. Kirby Ferguson has a fantastic
series looking into this called "Everythingis a Remix." I've also linked that down in
the description. The commonalities he showsare pretty crazy.Well, even when it comes to lyrics, to writing,
even though, mathematically, there are morepossibilities than we could ever exhaust,
we have gravitated towards a few. In fact,there's a form of poetic meter that is so
common it's called "Common Meter."I've composed a verse using it to explain what it is.Line one contains eight syllables. The next
contains just six. For emphasis: iambic stress.That's it, no other tricks.Here is a list of songs that are written in common
meter, also known as "Balad Meter." The commonnessof common meter is the reason you can sing
the Pokemon theme song to the tune of Gilligan'sIsland. Or House of the Rising Sun. Or Amazing
Grace. You could also use almost any of EmilyDickinson's poetry. Sure, they're different
melodies, but their lyrics are written inthe same meter.There's a great video on YouTube that I've
linked below in the description that usescaptions to let you see just how these all
fit together.Oh, and don't forget one of the greatest compositions
taking advantage of common meter's commonness:Stairway to Gilligan's Island.And you know what? Our brains may also be
keeping us from enjoying the entire mathematicalspace of available songs. For instance,
research has shown that the way a song compresses,using software, can help us predict how enjoyable
it will be. Too simple, too easy to compress,like, say, a rising scale, and the song doesn't
challenge us - it's boring. But too complicated,say, white noise, and the file won't compress
very much at all, and, likewise, we don'tseem to enjoy it. There's a magic zone where
a file is compressible by a computer, andalso happens to be enjoyable by us.So, interestingly, even though mathematically
speaking, there are so many possible uniquemelodies that we can safely say, there will
always be room for new music, we don't seemto be wired to care. We enjoy certain patterns
and melodies and calculating how many therecould be is a lot less interesting than how
connected and similar all the ones that weenjoy are. It's as if we have more space than
we need, more space than we could ever hopeto see all of, or visit all of, or know all
of, but no matter what new place we go, ina general sense, new, popular music will always
remind us a bit of home.And as always,thanks for watching.Fantastic, you're still here. If you want
to hear music from people like you, from Vsaucers,go check out WeSauce. You can submit music,
animation, short films, anything that you'remaking and putting on YouTube to us and we'll
feature it on WeSauce. It's like a trailerfor what Vsaucers are doing.Speaking of which, Jake Chudnow, who does
all of the music in these videos, has a brandnew song out over on his channel,
which I highly suggest you go give a listen.