The Fibonacci numbers again start:1, 1, 2, 3, 5and the rule is: if each number hereequals the one before itSo, if this was the nth numberand we're gonna call that x nfor the nth numberit equals the one before itplus the one before thatso that equalsx n minus oneplus x n minus twoSo that's our finding thingand what we're trying to findultimatelyis what is the ratio between the two of the numbersand importantly, becausewe're looking for the ratioit is approaching the limitit doesn't matter which two termsit should be the same ratio, give or takeandif you do infinitely many the same ratio for all of thembut,  rrrrhhhhhSo. Uh. For any two of the termsso what we can say nowis the ratio betweenx to the n and the one before thatwhich was x to the n minus one. The one before.should equal the same as the ratiobetween x n minus one to the one before thatwhich is x n minus twoand we're gonna call itWhat letter would you like Brady?awa aya aany any Greek letter?Do you have a favorite?Brady: uhhh....delta?Guy: DELTA!ok, so letsdo a capital deltabecause its quicker to drawso we're trying [to come up] with this ratio, delta is.and we know its the ratio between any twoconsecutive termsnow we knowaccording to our relationship which generates this sequencethat x n equals the two before itadded togetherso I'm gonna put that inintstead ofso all I've done is substitute that inbut now I could start simplifyingbecause I've got the same termthere twiceso, in fact, if I divide throughthat's one plusx to the n minus twoover x to the n minus onewhich still equalsx to the n minus one overx to the n minus twowhich still equal to the ratiodelta we're looking forso now you'll gohang on a secondthat is the same as this but upside downand in fact that equals that ratio deltaso I can now change this to beone  pluswell that's the inverse of this ratioso that's one over deltaequals and that there is the deltaand so the relationshipfor the ratio of any sequencewhere you get the next termfrom adding the two previous onesone plus the inverse of that ratioequals the ratioNow what ratio could that possibly be?well let's work it out!because we can turn thisinto aquadratic?If I multiply through by triangleit equals that plus oneequals triangle squaredand so delta squared minus deltaminus one equals zeroSo, all I've done is rearrange that formulanow we can solve this using our friend the quadratic equationcuz we knowthat if you have atimes x squared plusb x plus cequals zerothen x equals negative bplus or minusthe square root of b squared minus four a cover two aso we can substitute in to use the quadratic formulaSo we now know delta equalsnegative b, which is the coefficient therewhich will be oneplus or minus the square root of b squared --is going to be oneminus four times one, times negative one, so it's going to beplus four. Two times one is two. So that's going to equal...Now I'm only going to use the positive for now.One plus root 5 divided by two, which is the golden ratio.If you actually work that out, that's where 1.6180... comes from.And in fact, that is one of the definitions of the golden ratioAnd so that's why, for any starting term, it always approaches the same sequenceIf you use the negative, you get the negative inverse of the golden ratio; another wonderful property of it.It I'd use the negative... If I'd used equals one minus root five over twoand that equals -0.6180...So they're the two solutions to that [particular] equationSo, that's why it works of any sequence where you add two terms to get the next oneBrady: So the fact... The Fibonacci numbers meant nothing there?Guy: The Fibonacci numbers are one of [an] infinite family of such numbersbecause for any two whole numbers you want to start with, the exact same thing works outIn fact, why use whole numbers? Go bananas! At no point did I specify whole numbers here.It's just, whatever you start with, add two terms, you get the next one. You always get the golden ratioThat's not some special property Fibonacci numbers have.All of them have got that property. We want a better link.What we really want is a sequence of numbers which have a link the the golden ratiothat other sequences don't get. We want something above this.Brady: The Brady numbers!Guy: Well, the Brady numbers are wonderful, but I can go slightly betterSo, I'm going to show you the Lucas numbers.I, personally, am a massive golden ratio septic. I think it's hugely overrated...