HELLO Mr. Tarrou. Today we are going to be
talking parabolas. And I will see if i canget this video done if fifteen minutes and
if can't this will be two parts. Lets talkabout transformations. We learned about those
not very long ago. I am just going to putup here a very basic parabola. This is y equals
x squared. Now do you remember the transformationswere like? Say if I wanted to take this parabola
and shift it right two and down three unitsand reflect the parabola like this. Remember
what made those parabolas and the other sevenparent functions that we studied move around
like that? Right, down, reflect, horizontalflips and all that other good stuff. Well
if you do, great and if you don't let me helpyou out. This is going to be f of x or y.
Now I moved this parabola to the right anddown. Do you remember how left and right movement
showed up? That was when we had a plus orminus inside the function itself. So our function
is a power of two. We are going to have forthis movement to the right x minus two inside
my function. What else did I do to the parentfunction? I moved it down three. Where do
we find vertical shifts at?  That is the constantat the end of your equation (usually), so
minus three. This will take this parabolaand move it down three places. Now what caused
the refection over the x axis when we studiedtransformations of functions? That was when
you equation started off with a negative value.So this red equation now is the equation from
the parent function which has been moved tothe right two and down three. The was the
reflection about the x axis, the minus twois the movement to the right, and the negative
three at the end is our shift down. Well thetransformations chapter of our book... Of
if you want to go back and watch another video...if you are not in my class, helps us understand
what the standard form of a parabola comesfrom. The standard form for parabolas is f
of x equals plus or minus a... That is possiblea reflection about the x axis. If a is larger
than one, the graph is going to get pulledvertically and will appear to be skinnier
though it really is not. If a is less thanone and greater than zero, the graph has been
compressed... from your transformations section.x minus h squared plus k. This is the standard
form of a parabola, which is one of the conicsections that we are going to learn about
today. When you look at this standard form,you can tell a lot about the graph. You can
tell where the vertex is. This vertex of theparabola is at (2, -3). You can see that right
here. It is two, we want to change that signwhen we take it out of parenthesis, negative
three. Or, in standard form the vertex is(h,k) So, hopefully that looks familiar now
to the standard form getting tied into thetransformations section we covered a few weeks
ago. What else is in here? All parabolas havean axis of symmetry. A line that you can put
down the middle of the parabola. We are onlygoing to do vertical parabolas today so that
is going to be when x is squared. If y issquared the parabolas are horizontal. We will
study those later in the year. So if you havean x squared term, you have a vertical line
which is an axis of symmetry. Vertical lineshave an equation in the form of x equals a
number. What is the x value that the axisof symmetry is going to go through? It is
going to go through the vertex, so it is goingto be x equals h. Or x equals whatever the
x component is of your vertex. In this case,this will be x equals positive two for the
axis of symmetry. Um, there are other thingswe can find that we are going to do in minute
like x and y intercepts and also a parabola...A graph has a relative maximum when it has
a peak and then it falls on both sides. Thisred parabola will also have a relative maximum,
actually absolute maximum. The maximum willbe at two...negative three. We have been talking
about domain and range as well this year.The domain, what x values does this graph
include? All of them from negative infinityto positive infinity. What is the range? The
range is negative three all the way down tonegative infinity. In case you need some help
with that. Domain are you x's. And in someclass you may say all real numbers. In Precalc
we would say the domain is negative infinityto positive infinity... or in calculus. The
range in our particular example, the red parabola...well that is the y values and the largest
y value is negative three and it goes downfrom there. Thus the range is y is less than
or equal to negative three. Interval notationthat my kids are using starts with the smallest
y value which is negative infinity. The smallesty value is negative infinity going up to a
y value of negative three. The square bracketindicates the value of negative three is actually
used. There we go. A little tie in betweenour old chapter about transformations... left,
right horizontal movement, up and down movements,vertical flips and how that shows you we get
the standard form of a parabola. Now mostof our work today from here on out is going
to be about working with the general formof a parabola. So lets do that. We are going
to do one example. Graph it and find solutionsand do a nice graph, not just a sketch like
I have been doing with my students lately.la la la...la la la... Ok. Now that is clean
enough. Let take a look at this example ofa parabola. We got y equals negative two x
plus three x squared minus four. Ok now thisparabola is not in what we would call general
form. Because in general form you want yourexponents to count down as you go to the right.
Mine don't. I have an exponent of one andthen I have a two. So I am going to rewrite
this as y equals three x squared minus twox minus four. And go into.... Let me use function
notation. The general form of a parabola isax squared plus bx plus c. And we are going
to graph this parabola in general form. Lateron this year we will be studying conic sections
a lot and we will be using completing thesquare process to put this general form into
standard form. But, we are not doing completingthe square today and putting these into standard
form. So what if you are given a parabolaand you are asked to graph the parabola in
this form? Well step one is to find the xof the vertex. That is found by doing negative
b over 2a. Which is negative negative twobecause it is a, b, and c. Here is a, b, and
c. Over two a which is three. And this isgoing to come out to be two over six or one
third. Ok great! I am starting to understandwhere the vertex is at. Now the y part of
the vertex is found by taking this x valueand plugging it back into the function. So
that is going to be three times one thirdsquared minus two times one third minus four.
That is going to be three times one ninthminus two thirds minus four. That little fraction
work today is going to be one third minustwo thirds minus... Now I want to put all
three of these numbers together and my fourhas a denominator of one. So I am going to
multiply the top and bottom by three so wehave a common denominator. That will be negative
three, oops no it won't, it will be negativetwelve...yes minus twelve over three. So one
minus two is negative one, negative one minustwelve is negative thirteen over three. And
this parabola has a vertex which is at onethird negative thirteen over three. Good.
Now here is what I have got so far. I am goingto have to erase this by the way because I
don't think I will fit all this on my board.But uh... 1,2,3, 1,2,3 1,2,3 1,2,3,4 Lets
see if this is enough to make our sketch.Our vertex is at one third comma negative
thirteen over three. How many threes are inthirteen? Four leaving a remainder of one,
so that is going to be negative four and onethird. A little less than negative four. We
need to make another tick mark. One thirdand a little bit past negative four. About
right there is the vertex. Now, do you seethis leading coefficient? When the leading
coefficient is positive our parabola is goingto open up. If this three was negative the
parabola would open down. So I know that myparabola is going to open up from here. What
other points could we easily find to helpus graph this parabola and not just make a
sketch. Lets take a look at the y intercept.For a y intercept you want to let x equal
zero. When you cross the y axis, what is x?There is no horizontal movement so x will
be zero. Now that will be fairly easy to do.F of zero... I am switching to function notation...
is going to be three times zero squared minustwo times zero minus four. So F of zero, my
y intercept, is going to be negative four.SO, I have another point right here. Shall
I color code that? My y intercept is righthere. Ok...Good. Now I am going to need to
erase some of this work to help us find thex intercept because that is going to involve
factoring or the quadratic formula. Now Ihave shown you a little bit of factoring recently
so I am going to remind you of how to do thequadratic formula again. Which actually I
have done that recently as well. But thatis what we are doing. Anyway our y intercept
is when we let x equal zero. We are goingto find our x intercepts by letting y equal
zero. ohhh... almost erased my problem. So.I want to find the x intercepts of this. That
means let y equal zero. So what I want todo is solve for again the x intercept. Solve
this equation. Three x squared minus two xminus four equals zero. Alright! Lets see
what this looks like. With the quadratic formula...in case you don't remember what that is. The
quadratic formula is x equals negative b plusor minus the square root of b squared minus
four a c all over two a. You will with me?Alright! So if we are going to apply this
quadratic formula to the quadratic equationthat is in general form. That means this is
a which is three, b is going to be negativetwo, and c is negative four. So that is going
to be x equals negative b, watch the parenthesiswhen you are plugging in these numbers...
it helps, plus and minus the square root ofb squared minus four a, c, all over two a.
That is going to be two plus or minus thesquare root of four plus that is four and
twelve is forty eight over six. That is goingto be two plus or minus the square root of
fifty two over six. Now if you want to reducethis and have your answer in exact form, fifty
two is .... the square root of four timesthe square root of thirteen over six. So this
in exact form is two plus or minus two squareroot of thirteen over six. haha....do you
know where this is on the x axis? I don'teither! So if you type this into your calculator,
or this into your calculator, you are goingto get your decimal approximation. I am going
to cheat with my notes. It is negative pointeight seven and one point five. So this how
you solve a quadratic equation using the quadraticformula. I am pretty sure this could not have
been done with factoring as well. Now... thatmeans that I have an x intercept of negative
point eight seven. So at negative eight pointseven and at positive one point five... and
voila we have our parabola. Now lets see hereDomain before I run out of time. The x's from
negative infinity to positive infinity becausethat parabola will open up forever. The range
is going to be for my y values. My smallesty value is negative four point... I erased
it OH NO!!!... negative four point three threeto infinity. The axis of symmetry is a vertical
line with an equation of x equals, I erasedeverything too fast. Well whatever that x
value was of the vertex, that is the axisof symmetry. WOOO Go Do Your Homework. Thank
you!!!