our ability to learn and get better attasks through experience is part ofbeing humanwhen we are born we know almost nothingand can do almost nothing for ourselvesbut soon we're learning and becomingmore capable every day but did you knowthat computers can do the same. Machine learningbrings together statistics andcomputer science to enable computers tolearn how to do a given task withoutbeing programmed to do so. Just as yourbrain uses experience to improve a taskso can computers. Say you need a computerthat can tell the difference between apicture of a dog and a picture of a catyou could begin by feeding it images andtelling itthis one's a dog, that one's a cat.A computer programmed to learn will seekstatistical patterns within the datathat will enable it to recognize a cator dog in the future it might figure outon its own that cats have shorter nosesand dogs come in a larger variety ofsizes and then represent thatinformation numerically organizing in spacebut crucially it's the computer not theprogrammer that identifies those patternsand establishes the algorithm by whichfuture data will be sorted. One exampleof a simple yet highly effectivealgorithm is to find the optimal lineseparating cats from dogs. When thecomputer sees a new picture it checkswhich side of the line it falls on andthen says either cat or dog. But ofcourse there can be mistakes. The moredata the computer receives themore finely tunes its algorothm becomesand the more accurate it can bein its predictions. Machine learning isalready widely applied. It's the technologybehind facial recognition, text to speechrecognition, spam filters on your inbox,online shopping or viewingrecommendations, credit card frauddetection and so much more. At theUniversity of Oxford machine learningresearchers are combining statistics andcomputer science to build algorithmsthat can solve more complex problems,more efficiently, using less computingpowerFrom medical diagnosis to social mediathe potential of machine learning totransform our world is trulymind-blowing. To find out more about machinelearning visit www.OxfordSparks.ox.ac.ukfollow us on Twitter and find us onFacebook