So two weeks ago. We ran a video on Klein bottles and putting Rubik's cubes into Klein bottles and we got to talk about möbius strips and one of the things that are said about möbius strips caused a lot of, well, controversy - people were unsure about whether they really understood right what I was saying so I had to really kind of reply to a lot of things in the comments And what I thought today, I'll start out with that part of the video and I'll explain it a little bit, okay So, what is a möbius strip again? You know well, it's just a strip of paper To start with at least our möbius strips that we have here in our world these are strips of paper Well white side, a brown side and what you do is you give it a twist, one twist like this and then bring two loose ends together glued together and you get this and what you can see here is that the brown side gets connected with the white side and so what effect this has is basically turning the two sides that you had to start with into just one side right, so That's one of the properties here. Another one is same thing happens for the edges so to start with we've got Two Edges and when you kind of twist this thing and bring together the two edges get joined and you only have one edge left, so this movie strip has one edge and For later, one thing I should also say is So that's a movie strip. Just one twist if you give the whole thing two twists well, then what happens is that The white side gets connected to the white side the brown side is connected to the brown side That's not a mobius strip if you give it three twists so three twists so like that Then it's got that property again, okay and just in general if you give this thing an odd number of twists and then bring the two ends together Then you've got a mobius strip if you give the end an even number of twists. That's not a möbius strip. Okay now let's just watch this again, and See what I say there. Here's a really really big mobius strip okay, and Let's just say there's a you know like a creature living in here So there's like our our two dimensional man lives in here and at möbius strip that it doesn't have any any You know third dimension it's just you know, it's just It's it's there, but it doesn't have any third dimension. So [what] we can do is this man? Here is we can let him travel around to move your strip, okay? so let's just let him travel around the movie strip day travels and now he kind of just turns on the spot and Now something amazing has happened But just walking around the möbius strip this man has actually turned into his mirror image Okay, and a lot of people were unsure about them. Is that really true well, it is true if The man is really kind of embedded in the movie strip So the mobius strip this has no thickness zero thickness right the ideal mathematical möbius strip has zero thickness the man has zero thickness. right, so he's just kind of inside the mobius strip right, so When he kind of comes around here, after one roundtrip. He is really physically in the same spot that he started from and he's mirror reversed So that's how it works so I mean the people who were kind of unsure about this. What did they actually have in mind well What they had in mind was well That man here is kind of sliding around on the surface of this mobius strip And I've kind of indicated that with with a shadow here, okay? You can see there, so it's kind of hovering above the movies It was just sliding around on it, and so what happens if that man kind of slides around Well, let him slide around so he's a day slides and now at that point you [can] kind of see kind of goes behind right and So there he is and there [he] is and then kind of here at this point He's kind of hovering above and then when he's kind of once around he's hovering in the back and so it's actually not in the same spot, so Perfectly all right, right? But as I said I mean for the other video, right, we were kind of simply sliding inside a möbius strip here Yeah, it's a very good inside, and then we just do this one more time right so we do this one more time so we go for a second time around and then we actually get back to where we were. okay, and actually today since I can't turn myself into something with a Zero thickness, I actually want to slide around on the surface I want to actually go for a real trip on a on a mobius strip I want to take you along I've been wanting to do this for a long time actually but only recently I discovered that I can actually do this properly okay? So here we go Has anybody here played Mario Kart 8? well if you have If you have a look at the 8th there, you'll actually see it's a mobius strip. So it's got a twist in it and Not only that there's some courses in there, actually there's one course in there, which is a proper mobius strip and So what I want to do is you know? Take over Mario Kart 8 and turn to into Mathologer car infinity, all right, so there's me now racing around on the möbius strip and I'm going to just slow it down When you've any kind of play Mario Kart 8 it all passes so fast you don't really know what's happening so we're going to take this easy, and you know really have a have a Leisurely stroll around to the möbius track, and see how it looks, okay? So here we go so the one that we're going for is called flower cup. If you have the game you can play flower cup, and there's a castle of kind over there in the corner You can already see there's something weird happening right so here We've got a surface of a street that should end up up there, but you can already see There's a surface also coming down at the bottom so that indicates we are doing something mobius strip-y, alright? Ok so there that's the intro scene that's interesting. So you know can already see This is this is going to be good, right And then there from another angle, right, so there it comes in from another angle and actually that that goes really fast and if you don't You know don't freeze it here. You won't even notice well. You've got the whole thing here That's actually the only time in the whole game. They can see the whole racecourse. That's the whole thing and here You can actually already see the mobius strip okay, so there's the movie strip You can see you know we've kind of start out here at the top raised around here And then it kind of twists in the back, okay, let's just go for a ride on this thing So there we go So here I am Mathologer in his car and we get started so at the moment. We are up there, right? We're kind of coming around the corner there I've got all these people in the way and my science experiment is terrible And I'm actually always hugging here to the left side And we're really close to the castle at the beginning, and so now we are where? We're down there at the bridge That's a down at the bridge And you can you can kind of look around you see the waterfall here on the right side And you know just take your time really take this and maybe go fullscreen here to really take in the experience, right? It's you know. It's basically the [only] spot where you can do this sort of thing, okay now. We're going across the bridge [alright], so at this point in time We're already like this [alright], so [obviously] they have some special anti-gravity You know cards here, so it's a pretty good thing, right? So we really kind of vertical like this, and now we're going around to spend here in a second we're going to come across the the cubes that are hanging there and I just bumped into the stem hedgehog Okay and Well at this point in time. You almost upside down. You can already see you know You're almost on your head now, and you know the castle is facing the other way, okay. Let's just keep going Alright now, we're really fully upside down here And you can see the flags, kind of being pulled on the other direction which is really really nice so we keep on going, keep on going and well, remember, so when we started out, I was always hugging the left side of the street here the racecourse and to start with I was Well hugging here on the left I was kind of close to the castle now still here on the on the left actually on the other side I don't know that's just a reflection of the fact that the two edges get connected here, okay? So now we just keep on going now. We're really underneath this part And kind of coming around You can also see here wherever mario is okay. [all] right now. Where are we well? We are just under here and we're kind of heading for the bridge again okay, so I'm heading for the bridge there we're at the bridge again, but now we're underneath the bridge and Just have a look around But you can see what it can identify here in terms of you know the mushrooms and stuff as we kind of keep on going all right, and Now end of the bridge now. We're going again Kind of like that and now we're going up and around and so the next stop is going to be just so now we're Facing the right way again. So we're not up at the trees up at the trees. We're almost done here So now comes the spectacular part where you kind of start flying? That's really good But that was just part one so it just fast-forward to the last round because that was really interesting so here I go, and I'm in second position at the moment and There's this guy here and see what happens. I [win] amazing So really good right obviously. I mean I've never played this game before, my my little ones They play it all the time, so they show me how to do it But I won after a couple of tries in a really really spectacular way, huh? So before we move on let's actually have a look at the menu again So if you have a look here, there's the well I was actually playing the baby category which is 50Cc Everybody's laughing. I'm sure But anyway, I want There's a menu item here called mirror. Which is kind of interesting, so if you click on mirror this happens here okay, so [you] see Here on this side the regular racecourse and here on the other side the mirror reversed Racecourse and obviously it's both mobius strips, and how do you get these movies strips? well if you've got a piece of paper You put a piece of paper you twist it this way you get one move your strip you twist It that way you get the other move your strip Maybe do it with two pieces of paper and then something very interesting Mathematically happens is that if you've got your two pieces of paper. You can't actually manipulate that one on that side To be that one on the other side, so they are you know you can't turn one into the other. All right Now let's go, or let's try to go for a real ride on a mobius strip. Okay and obviously I'm in the place Where you would look for a real mobius strip is like a theme park, right? they've got these rollercoasters happening all right and you get you know loop-de-loops and Twists and all sorts of other stuff happening, and you would think well one of those things should be a mobius strip right? But actually you can see pretty easily that none of them are möbius strips so Let's just have a look at this so if you've got A roller coaster like that okay? Then well you start out somewhere you start out somewhere, and then you do all sort of kind of contortions And then eventually get back to where you started from okay? Now if you have a odd number of twists in your racetrack then this happens, okay? So we're just going to go for our ride here now. I just put one twist in but obviously in a real roller coaster There's got to be many So we kind of go around and then we get back to the start and when we get actually back to the start? We are upside down now I've been looking for this But I haven't been able to find any roller coaster that actually does this all right now They could actually do it or they could actually do it and and obviously can't get out here all right It wouldn't be a good idea to don't unfasten the seat belt at this point But what they could do is they could just have The car kind of run around racetrack twice right so on the first Around you kind of go from facing up to facing down, but then you just kind of run one more time? Then you actually be the right way around and you could get out of the car. So I mean in principle They should be able to do a real mobius strip rollercoaster like this, but I'm just not aware of any Anywhere in the world who does this if any of you have been on one of them? I'd love to hear about it. Okay, so Message no Rollercoasters. No Möbius strip roller coasters well There is a bit of a twist to this So there is these really really old roller coasters. They're called dual track Roller coasters and while they've been around for more than a hundred years and there's one of them in Blackpool in England and What you can see here is there's two cars kind of riding side by side okay? So that's two cars riding side by side and I mean for today these are sort of boring because you never do like Loop-de-loops, or you never kind of really twist around you always go level actually always go level you kind of just go up and down Right you can start somewhere you can't go up and down you go around This way that way up mountains down mountains and eventually get back to where you started from now as these dual track ones there's kind of two cars kind of riding side-by-side, and they're kind of doing a race alright, so this car got of course around the Bend then it goes faster than this one, so it kind of races ahead, and then eventually the other one will Catch up, and it kind of do a race like that. It's really really fun Now something weird happens on some of these dual track roller coasters, and I'll just show you what what that is okay? So You've got these two sides where people get in okay? And then as I said kind of get started right and we kind of run parallel all the time, right? So we run parallel one cars here on this this this red track one is on the on the blue track They run side by side, okay There's a run side by side and now the weird thing that happens on the dual track Roller coaster in Blackpool for example is that once They've completed their round trip That blue car that started out here on the on the right side actually ends up on the left side and the car that started on the left side ends up on the right side It's very very mysterious right, so anybody kind of go on this one for the first time your words What happened here and actually this thing is called a mobius loop Roller coaster? And just just just just have another look [waste] is so mysterious right, so this is basically the racetrack. This is the racetrack This is the roller coaster right, so we're always level like this we're always kind of parallel right and then this thing basically looks like this with a couple of mountains in it kind of [craft] kind of going like this and That but daisy that's what a day, so I I mean you look at it You see well the red car here starts out on the left and should a dump end up on the left after one round trip And same thing with the blue car, but they don't so what happens right so I mean that the illusion is really We're always kind of side by side, you know Exactly, so how do we switch well? There's a really really sneaky thing they do At the beginning of the track at the beginning of the track what happens is that you're actually not Parallel you kind of to wind up phase the wind up Phase is different for the two cars and actually what happens is [that] one car kind of? Bridges across the others track like that and to kind of switch like this, okay? And you don't notice this because you're looking around you know and then when you kind of start noticing We're kind of side by side and at that point in time the sides have already switched and obviously when you kind of start out Like this you kind of switch over here, and you end up on that side and the other way round and now if you actually look at the track as This orange band you actually see where we've got a möbius strip here So there are real mobius strip or mobius loop roller coasters, and I'll leave you with that.