[Intro]Who doesn't like fractals?  They're abeautiful blend of simplicity andcomplexity often including theseinfinitely repeating patterns.Programmers in particular tend to beespecially fond of them, because it often takesa shockingly small amount of code toproduce images that are way moreintricate than any human hand ever couldhope to draw.  But a lot of people don'tactually know the definition of afractal; at least not the one that BenoitMandelbrot, the father fractal geometry,had in mind.  A common misconception isthe fractals are shapes that are perfectlyself-similar.  For example this snowflakelooking shape right here called the VonKoch snowflake, consists of threedifferent segments, and each one of theseis perfectly self-similar, in that whenyou zoom in on it, you get a perfectlyidentical copy of the original.  Likewisethe famous Sierpinski triangle consistsof three smaller identical copies ofitself.  And don't get me wrong, self-similarshapes are definitely beautiful,and they're a good toy model for whatfractals really, are but Mandelbrot had amuch broader conception in mind, onemotivated not by beauty, but by a morepragmatic desire to model nature in away that actually captures roughness.In some ways, fractal geometry is arebellion against calculus, whose centralassumption is that things tend to looksmooth if you zoom in far enough.But Mandelbrot saw this is overly idealized,or at least needlessly idealized,resulting in models that neglect thefiner details of the thing that they'reactually modeling, which can matter!What he observed is that self similar shapesgive a basis for modeling the regularityin some forms of roughness.  But thepopular perception that fractals onlyinclude perfectly self similar shapes isanother over-idealization, one thatironically goes against the pragmaticspirit of fractal geometry is origins.The real definition of fractals has todo with this idea of fractal dimensionthe main topic of this video.  You see,there is a sense, a certain way to definethe word dimension, in which theSierpinski triangle is approximately 1.585dimensional; that the Von Koch curveis approximately 1.262-dimensional;the coastline of Britain turns out to bearound 1.21-dimensional.And in general, it's possibleto have shapes whose dimension is anypositive real number, not just wholenumbers.  I think when i first heardsomeone reference fractional dimensionlike this I just thought it was nonsense,right?  I mean, mathematicians are clearlyjust making stuff up.  Dimension issomething that usually only makes sensefor natural numbers, right?  A line isone-dimensional; a plane, that's twodimensional; this space that we live in,that's three dimensional, and so on.And in fact, any linear algebra students whojust learned the formal definition ofdimension in that context would agree,  itonly makes sense for counting numbers.And of course the idea of fractaldimension is just made up.I mean, this is math, everything is made up.But the question is whether or not itturns out to be a useful construct formodeling the world.  And I think you'llagree, once you learn how fractaldimension is defined, it's something thatyou start seeing almost everywhere thatyou look.  It actually helps to start thediscussion here by only looking atperfectly self similar shapes.  In factI'm going to start with four shapes, thefirst three of which aren't evenfractals: A line, a square, a cube, and aSierpinski triangle.  All of these shapes areself-similar.  A line can be broken upinto two smaller lines, each of which isa perfect copy of the original justscaled down by a half.  A square can bebroken down into four smaller squareseach of which is a perfect copy of theoriginal just scaled down by a half.Likewise, a cube can be broken down intoeight smaller cubes, againeach one is a scaled-down version byone-half.  And the core characteristic ofthe Sierpinski triangle is that it'smade of three smaller copies of itself,and the length of the side of one ofthose smaller copies is one-half theside length of the original triangle.It's fun to compare how we measure these.We would say that the smaller lineis one half the length of the originalline, the smaller square is one-quarterthe area of the original square, thesmall cube is one eighth the volume of theoriginal cube and that smallersierpinski triangle.....well we'll talk about how to measurethat in just a moment.  What I want is aword that generalizes the idea of length,area and volume,but which I can apply to all of thoseshapes and more.  Typically in math, theword that you use for this is "Measure",but i think it might be more intuitiveto talk about "mass".  As in, imagine thateach of these shapes is made out ofmetal: A thin wire, a flat sheet, a solidcube, and some kind of Sierpinskimesh.  Fractal dimension has everything todo with understanding how the mass ofthese shapes changes as you scale them.The benefit of starting the discussionwith self-similar shapes is that itgives us a nice clear-cut way to comparemasses.  When you scale down that line byone half, the mass is also scaled down byone-half, which you can viscerally seebecause it takes two copies of thatsmaller one to form the whole.  When youscale down a square by one-half, itsmass is scaled down by one fourth, whereagain you can see this by piecingtogether four of the smaller copies toget the original.  Likewise, when you scaledown that cube by one half, the mass isscaled down by one eighth, or one-half cubed,because it takes eight copies of thatsmaller cube to rebuild the original.And when you scale down this Sierpinskitriangle by a factor of a half,wouldn't you agree that it makes senseto say that its mass goes down by afactor of one-third?  I mean, it takesexactly three of those smaller ones toform the original.  But notice that forthe line, the square, and the cube, thefactor by which the mass changed is thisnice clean integer power of one half.In fact that exponent is the dimension ofeach shape.  And what's more, you could saythat what it *means* for a shape to be, for example,two-dimensional, what puts the"two" in two-dimensional, is that when youscale it by some factor, its mass isscaled by that factor raised to thesecond power.And maybe what it means for a shape tobe three-dimensional is that when youscale it by some factor, the mass isscaled by the *third* power of that factor.So if this is our conception of dimension,what should the dimensionality of theSierpinski triangle be?  You want to saythat when you scale it down by a factorof one-half, its mass goes down byone half to the power of... well whatever itsdimension is.  But because it's self-similar,we know that we want the mass to godown by a factor of one third.  So what'sthe number D such that raising one halfto the power of D gives you one third?Well, that's the same as asking to 2 to the whatequals 3, the quintessential type ofquestion that logarithms are meant toanswer.  And when you go and plug-inlog base two of 3 to a calculator, whatyou'll find is that it's about 1.585.  soin this way, this Sierpinski triangle isnot one-dimensional, even though youcould define a curve that passes throughall its points, and nor is ittwo-dimensional, even though it lives inthe plane. Instead it's1.585-dimensional.  And if you want todescribe its mass, neither length norarea seem like the fitting notions.  Ifyou tried its length would turn out tobe infinite, and its area would turn outto be 0.  Instead what you want iswhatever the 1.585-dimensionalanalog of length is.  Here let's look atanother self-similar fractal,  the VonKoch curve.  This one is composed of foursmaller identical copies of itself, eachof which is a copy of the originalscaled down by one third. So the scalingfactor is one-third, and the mass hasgone down by a factor of one-fourth.That means the dimension should be somenumber D so that when we raise one thirdto the power of D it gives us one fourth.Well that's the same as saying 3 to thewhat equals four.So you can go and plug into a calculatorlog base 3 of 4, and that comes out to bearound 1.262so in a sense of on curve is a1.262-dimensional shape.Here's another fun one.  This is kind ofthe right-angled version of the KochCurve.  It's built up of eight scaled-downcopies of itself, where the scalingfactor here is one fourth.So if you want to know its dimension itshould be some number D such that one fourthto the power of D equals one eighth, thefactor by which the mass just decreased.And in this case the value we want islog base 4 of 8, and that's exactly three halves.So evidently, this fractal isprecisely 1.5 dimensional.  Does that kindof makes sense?  It's weird, but it's alljust about scaling and comparing masseswhile you scale.  What I've describedso far, everything up to this point iswhat you might call "self-similaritydimension".  It does a good job making theidea of fractional dimension seem atleast somewhat reasonable, but there's aproblem.It's not really a general notion.  I mean,when we were reasoning about how themass of a shape should change, it relied onthe self similarity of the shapes; thatyou could build them up from smallercopies of themselves.  But that seemsunnecessarily restrictive.  After all, mosttwo-dimensional shapes are not at allself-similar.  Consider the disk, theinterior of a circle. We know that it'stwo-dimensional, and you can say that this isbecause when you scale it up by a factorof 2, its mass (proportional to the area)gets scaled by the square of that factor,in this case four.  But it's not likethere's some way to piece together fourcopies of that smaller circle to rebuildthe original.  So how do we know that thebigger disk is exactly four times themass of the original?  Answering thatrequires a way to make this idea of massa little more mathematically rigorous,since we're not dealing with physicalobjects made of matter, are we?  We'redealing with purely geometric onesliving in an abstract space.There's a couple ways to think aboutthis, but here is a common one.  Cover theplane with the grid and highlight all ofthe grid squares that are touching thedisk. Now count how many there are.  Inthe back of our minds, we already knowthat a disk is two-dimensional, and thenumber of grid squares that it touchesshould be proportional to its area.  Aclever way to verify this empirically isto scale up that disk by some factor,like two, and count how many grid squarestouch this new scaled-up version.  Youshould find is that that number hasincreased approximately in proportion tothe square of our scaling factor, whichin this case means about four times asmany boxes.Well...admittedly what's on the screenhere might not look that convincing, butit's just because the grid is reallycoarse.  If instead you took a much finergrid, one that more tightly captures theintent we're going for here by measuringthe size of the circle, that relationshipof quadrupling the number of boxestouched when you scale the disk by afactor of two should shine through moreclearly.I'll admit, though, that when I wasanimating this I was surprised by justhow slowly this value converges to 4.Here's one way to think about this:  Ifyou were to plot the scaling factorcompared to the number of boxes that thescaled disk touches, your data should veryclosely fit a perfect parabola, since thenumber of boxes touched is roughlyproportional to the square of thescaling factor.  For larger and largerscaling values, which is actuallyequivalent to just looking at a finergrid, that data is going to moreperfectly fit that parabola.  Now gettingback to fractals, let's play this gamewith the Sierpinski triangle, countinghow many boxes are touching points inthat shape.  How would you imagine thatnumber compares to scaling up thetriangle by a factor of 2 and countingthe new number of boxes touched?Well, the proportion of boxes touched bythe big one to the number of boxes touchedby the small one should be about three.After all, that bigger version is justbuilt up of three copies of the smallerversion.  You could also think about thisas two raised to the dimension of thefractal, which we just saw is about 1.585.And so if you were to go and plot thescaling factor in this case against thenumber of boxes touched by theSierpinski triangle, the data wouldclosely fit a curve with the shape ofy= x^(1.585), just multiplied by someproportionality constant. But importantly,the whole reason that i'm talking aboutthis is that we can play the same gamewith non-self-similar shape that stillhave some kind of roughness.The classic example here is the coastline ofBritain.  If you plop that coastline intothe plane and count how many boxes aretouching it, then scale it by someamount and count how many boxes aretouching that new scaled version, whatyou'd find is that the number of boxestouching the coastline increasesapproximately in proportion to thescaling factor raised to the power of1.21.  Here, it's kind of fun to thinkabout how you would actually computethat number empirically. As in, imagine Igive you some shape, and you're savvyprogrammer.  How would you find thisnumber?What I'm saying here is that if youscale this shape by some factor, whichI'll call "s" the number of boxes touchingthat shape should equal some constant timesthat scaling factor raised to whateverthe dimension is; the value that we'relooking for.Now if you have some data plot thatclosely fits a curve that looks likethe input raised to some power, it can behard to see exactly what that powershould be, so a common trick is to takethe logarithm of both sides.  That way, thedimension is going to drop down from theexponent and we'll have a nice cleanlinear relationship.  What this suggestsis that if you were to plot the log ofthe scaling factor against the log ofthe number of boxes touching thecoastline, the relationship should looklike a line, and that line should have aslope equal to the dimension.   So whatthat means is that if you tried out awhole bunch of scaling factors, countedthe number of boxes touching the coastin each instant, and then plotted thepoints on the log-log plot, you couldthen do some kind of linear regressionto find the best fit line to your dataset, and when you look at the slope ofthat line, that tells you the empiricalmeasurement for the dimension of whatyou're examining.  I just think that makesthis idea fractal dimension so much morereal and visceral compared to abstractartificially perfect shapes.  And onceyou're comfortable thinking aboutdimension like this,you my friend have become ready to hearthe definition of a fractal.  Essentially,fractals are shapes whose dimension is not aninteger but instead some fractionalamountWhat's cool about that is that it's aquantitative way to say that they'reshapes that are rough, and they stayrough even as you zoom in.Technically, there's a slightly moreaccurate definition, and I've included it inthe video description, but this idea hereof a non-integer dimension almostentirely captures the idea of roughnessthat were going for.There is one nuance, though, that Ihaven't brought up yet but is worthpointing out, which is that thisdimension, at least as I've described it so farusing the box counting method, cansometimes change based on how farzoomed in you are.   For example here's ashape sitting in three dimensions whichat a distance looks like a line.  In 3d, bythe way, when you do a box counting youhave a 3d grid full of little cubesinstead of little squares, but it worksthe same way.  At the scale where theshape's thickness is smaller than thesize of the boxes,it looks one-dimensional, meaning thenumber of boxes it touches isproportional to its length.  But when youscale it up it starts behaving a lotmore like a tube, touching the boxes onthe surface of that tube, and so it'lllook two dimensional, with the number ofboxes touched being proportional to thesquare of the scaling factor.  But it'snot really a tube, it's made of theserapidly winding little curves, so onceyou scale it up even more, to the pointwhere the boxes can pick up on thedetails of those curves, it looksone-dimensional again, with the number ofboxes touched scaling directly inproportion to the scaling constant.  Soactually assigning a number to a shapefor its dimension can be tricky and itleaves room for differing definitionsand different conventions.  In a pure mathsetting there are indeed numerousdefinitions for dimension, but all ofthem focus on what the limit of thisdimension is at closer and closer zoomlevels.You can think of that in terms of theplot as the limit of this slope as youmove farther and farther to the right.So for a purely geometric shape to be agenuine fractal, it has to continuelooking rough even as you zoom ininfinitely far.  But in a more appliedsetting, like looking at the coastline ofBritain, it doesn't really make sense totalk about the limit as you zoom in moreand more.  I mean at some point you'd justbe hitting atoms.  Instead what you do isyou look at a sufficiently wide range ofscales from very zoomed out up to veryzoomed in, and compute the dimension ateach one.  And in this more appliedsetting, a shape is typically consideredto be a fractal only when the measureddimension stays approximately constant,even across multiple different scales.For example, the coastline of Britaindoesn't just look 1.21-dimensional ata distance.  Even if you zoom in by afactor of a thousand, the level ofroughness is still around 1.21. Thatright there is the sense in which manyshapes from nature actually are self-similaralbeit not perfectself-similarity.  Perfectly self-similarshapes do play an important role infractal geometry.  What they give us aresimple-to-describe low-informationexamples of this phenomenon of roughness;roughness that persists at manydifferent scales and arbitrarily closescales.  And that's important!  It gives usthe primitive tools for modeling thesefractal phenomena.  But I think it's alsoimportant not to view them as theprototypical examples of fractals, sincefractals in general actually have a lotmore character to them.I really do think that this is one ofthose ideas where once you learn it, itmakes you start looking at the worldcompletely differently.  What this numberis, what this fractional dimension givesus, is a quantitative way to describeroughness.  For example the coastline ofNorway is about 1.52-dimensional,which is a numeric away to communicatethe fact that it's *way* more jaggedy thanBritain's coastline.  The surface of acalm ocean might have a fractaldimension only barely above two, while astormy one might have a dimension closerto 2.3.  In fact, fractal dimension doesn'tjust arise frequently in nature, it seemsto be the core differentiator betweenobjects that arise naturally and thosethat are just man-made.For the final animation here I have acertain whimsical pi creature fractal Iwant to show you.  But first I want tothank the supporters of this channel.Foremost are those of you contributing onpatreon.  Supporters are getting earlyaccess to essence of calculus videos asI make them, and it's been really nicehaving a collection of thoughtful earlyviewers to provide feedback.  Thisparticular video was also supported inpart by Affirm.  They're this financial techcompany, where I actually used to work,and these days they're growing a ton.They're always looking to hire talentedsoftware engineers and data scientists,and I know that a lot of you out therewatching a video about fractal dimensionjust for funare that technical talent.  Like I said, ina former life, before I went more intomath, I was actually on their datascience team, and I can tell you thepeople there are incredible.  I mean, i'veworked with smart teams before, butAffirm has an unusual concentration ofbrilliant minds and technology.  I thinkit's one of those things where smartminds tend to attract other smart mindsin this positive feedback loop,you know what I mean?  They're tacklingconsumer credit in a pretty novel waythat no one else seems to be doing, andthey can always benefit from a few moreskilled people to help them just do whatthey're doing.  If you're interested inapplying,  I've included a link that's onthe screen and in the description totheir careers page, and this is kind of aspecial link, in that if you apply byfirst going through that page, it willlet both me and Affirm know that youheard about them through this video. It'sbasically just a way to track theefficacy of outreach like this, so evenif you don't apply immediately andinstead come back a few days later, itwould help out for clean data's sake ifyou still went through that page.  So youshould definitely check them out, andhere is that final animation that Ipromise you.