Recently we did a video onshowing why 9.999 going on forever is equal to 10.And afterwards we got a request from someone in Koreato do something relatedwhich we're going to do today.And I found a really, really nice movie clip that kind of introduces it, so let's just watch that first.A negative times a negative equals a positive.A negative times a negative equals a positive.Say it.A negative times a negative equals a positive.Say it.A negative times a negative equals a positive.Again.A negative times a negative equals a positive.A negative times a negative equals a positive.I can't hear you.A negative times a negative equals a positive.Louder!A negative times a negative equals a positive!Louder!A negative times a negative equals a positive!Why?Well first of all, I mean, what's the movie here? What's the movie? Very famous movie.You may not be familiar with it but it's famous among teachers, especially:"Stand and Deliver".You may be familiar with the actorwho's the same actor who played Commander Adama on Battlestar Galactica.Anyway if you haven't seen the movie, check it out. "Stand and Deliver".Great, great movie. Great clip.So the question is "why is negative times negative positive?"And well you might ask, "well what else can it be?"Well, the only reason you ask "what else can it be?" is because you've been indoctrinatedinto believing that negative times negative is positive.It's actually a bit tricky when you first encounter it.You may have forgotten about when you first encountered it.So let's just remind ourselves of what the issue really is.okAnd for that we'll try and put ourselves into the...shoes of some ancient civilization.So they've just introduced numbers.So maybe they've got all the positive numbers under control,they've got zero.And now they just lost their innocence,they've introduced money and now there's people owing money to other people. So there's people in debt.And so to describe this they've made up negative numbers?Now you just have to combine these positive numbers and the negative numbers.And, well, some of the things are kind of under control. Let us see where we've got so far.We've got things like, 3 + 4...obviously 7.Then somebody might be 3 in debtAnd now he gets 4and so that leaves him with 1.What about 3 in debt and then he goes further 4 into debt.And so that is 7 debt.But now, "times".So what is that supposed to mean?A negative number times a negative number.So what do we do with this? Hmm..A bit tricky, so lets just step up back a bit.So minus 3 times 4...Well that's something we can handle.So basically whenever we see something like thisthe way we interpret it is like 3 times 4so we take 3, and then wedo 3 plus 3 plus 3 plus 3, so 4 timesand that gets twelve.So we can do the same stuff here with,  minus 3So it's (minus 3) plus (minus 3) plus (minus 3) plus (minus 3)It's minus 12. Ok good, all under control.What about this one here?HmmThat's already a little bit tricky, right?3 times -4What's that supposed to mean?So we've got 3, and then we're supposed to do this.. minus 4 timesWell, whatever, right?So at this point in time, and it's actually a really really good approach in mathematics and just in generalis we just got to do it.Just going to do it Nike approach. That's the T-shirt today. We're just going to do it.Well we know all the stuff about the positive numbers, how they behave. right?We know all the rulesAndwe want those rules to still all workwhen we're finished with introducingall those extra bits about the negative numbers.So, we're just going to think positiveand we think maybe it's gonna work out.And if it's gonna work out, so, what's gonna happen?Well, the first thing is, with positive numberswe know that if we've got two positive numbers,like 3 and 4,we can also switch the order, and thenthe result is the same.So, in this case, if things are good in the end,we should be able to just switch two numbers aroundand we've got (-4)*3, and we already know ¨C that's (-12).All under control.Now, back to this one here.And again, we just continue
with our "just do it" approach. Right?So we want things to hang
together in exactly the same wayas we're used to.So for a start, we don't know what that is, OK?So let's just take the "times -4" away, store it away thereAnd now what we're going to do iswe're going to turn the (-3) into something familiar.Into something positive. OK,And what we're gonna do with this iswe're going to just add 3. OK? So we're gonna add 3.And what comes out?Zero. OK?So... Well, we haven't turned it to something positivebut we have turned it into something
that we can control, a 0 and a 3.We know how to multiply those two numbers with...minus... negative numbers, right?And so, what we're going to do now iswe're gonna just go on autopilotWe're multiplying that whole equation by (-4)Alright? So let's get going.0 times (-4) is?OPERATOR: 0!
BURKARD: Perfect :)OK, 3 times (-4) is?
OPERATOR: (-12).Very good.Alright, we're on track.And (-3) times (-4)? We still don't knowbut we can just put it in now. OK?So we put it in, and now we've got an equation.And there's basically one unknown, right?One thing we dont' know, and two things we do know.And we can just solve things now
for the unknown, basically.Or, other way, we just add 12 to both sidesof this equation. OK?And that gives us: (-3) times (-4) is equal to 12.And so that's basically forced on us.So ifwe want things to work the waythey used to work, with just positives numberswe don't have a choice herewe have to say that (-3)*(-4) is equal to 12.OK, that's just our "just do it" approach.But, of course, now comes the checking period.So how will we check that all of
this kind of makes sense?Well, we can check it as mathematicians.As mathematicians, we can now go and saywith the way we've introducedmultiplication of negative numbers by negative numbersis everything consistent? Are we going to get anythings that go wrong?Can we get contradictions, stuff like this?And we've checked, and everything is fine.So that.. that's good.But then, of course, the other thing we want to know isthat, you know, do these things actually work in real life?So if we have something in real lifeand it kind of matches in with negative numbers,is this going to give us the right result?That would be good, right?Well, we could just be lazy and, you know,unleash it on humanity and waita couple of hundred years to see
whether anything goes wrong.Well, we kind of have done this, and
nothing did go wrong,So we can probably, yeah...OK, it's OK. It's OK, right :)But let me just give you an example of the first bitthat things can't go wrong within mathematics.And I've got a really, really nice application for this.And I do this quite often when I go to schools.So, when I go to schools, I've got different routinesSo I may talk about the mathematics of juggling,so I talk about... you know, I juggle a little bitand then I talk about the maths of it.But I've also got one routine where I...
I'm a "lightning calculator".So, a person who can calculatereally-really quickly just using his mind. Right?And.. So I would, maybe, ask you for your date of birthand I immediately tell you on which day (of the week) you're born.Or I square numbers.OK? So I ask "Give me a number",and I square it, quickly.And I just want to show you what I do there.Let's say, you say "square 48", OK?Then the way I do it for this particular routine isI rewrite 48 as (40+8). OK?And then I use this rule:(a+b)^2 is equal to (a^2+2ab+b^2). OK?And, of course, here, what's "a"?"a" is 40, and "b" is 8.So let's just do it, right. So we needa^2, which is 40^24 times 4 is 16, then we add two zeros ¨C 1600.Cool. Then we need2*4*8. So 2*4*8, that's 8*8 = 64.And another zero, so it's 640.OK? And then the last one isb^2. "b" is 8, so 8^2 is another 64. OK?And quickly add it up, and you get 2304.Very quick. I mean, that doesn't even take ayou know, half a second. It's just there.Alright. But to be honest,I actually don't do this one here.I do something different.I mean that if this 8 was a 2, I would do it like this.But since it's a 8, and this number isactually pretty close to 50, what I actually really do isI use (50-2). And I use the same rule.Now, (50 - 2) is (50 + (-2)).So the "b" is now (-2). So in the end we're actuallygoing to do (-2) times (-2).So let's just see whether we get the same result, right?So 50^2 is 2500. Then we need 2*50*(-2),which is (-200).And now comes the tricky one, right?
(-2) times (-2)is 4, right? Nothing else. It's 4.So we have to actually add 4, and you can seeat a glance: we get the same result.All is good. And just in generalno matter what kind of, you know,acrobatics you try to do, to get into somethingthat doesn't work, which works one wayand doesn't work the other way,you're never going to get into any troubleif you introduce negative numbers like this.So that's really-really good, right?OK! But in real life, does this thing actuallycome up in real life? You know, (-2) times (-2)?Well, actually, to be absolutely honest,most people will be able to lead a perfectly fine lifewithout ever using this :) Without ever using this rule.And it's actually been... historically, it's beenyou know, a fairly late development.And there have actually been lots of fights over it,whether it should be like this or some other way.So, it's a fairly late thing thatnegative times negative equals positivemade an appearance and became accepted.But there are actually instances in real lifewhere you can have an interpretationof all this stuff, which kind of makes sense,which kind of fits in what we've introduced.So let's just give a one example here.So, we're multiplying two numbers,There's the first number,
there's the second number.The first number we're going to interpret ascredit (like money)if it's a positive number, and as debt
if it's a negative number. OK?The second number we're going to interpretas gaining something [if positive].So here we're gaining something four times.Or losing something (four times) if
it's a negative number. OK?And then these are all kind of combinations
of positives with negatives.So,  3 credit, and we have this 4 timesthen, of course, we've got 12 credit, OK?Or 3 credit: when we lose 3 credit 4 times,well, then we have a debt of 12. OK?Or if we've got a debt of 3and we do this 4 times, so we gain a debt 4 times,then we also have -12. So we've got a debt of 12.And what about the debt of 3, and welose the debt... so losing the debt means gaining, right?So we lose a debt of 3 four times.That means we've got a credit of 12.Makes sense, right? So it fits in.And whatever else you can think of inreal life, also makes sense.OK, so, it's all good. Right?"Why?"So why? Why? Well, becauseif we introduce it like this,it's the only way in which we can get really-
really nice mathematics happening,which extends all the nice things we
are used to from the positive numbers.But also, it works. It works. And, I mean, we'vewe've been trialing it for a couple of hundred yearsit really works :)So it's really good. Now just an afterthought.Within mathematicsthere's a few places where you're dealing with screwed up multiplications.And, just from my personal history,there was an instant when I actually was getting intoresearch where it was getting very important to define(-2) times (-2) is (+8).Well, maybe, I'll tell you about
that one in another video :)