Bam!Mr. Tarrou!In this video we are going to go fly a kite!And that means we are going to be introduced to a four sided figure, a quadrilateralthat has two pairs of consecutive sides which are congruentand yet no opposite sides are allowed to be congruentand it is the shape of a kite.  You know, go out in the wind and have yourself some fun!So we have a four-sided figure, a quadrilateral. And as I wrap aroundand go consecutively, just wrap around the quadrilateralthese two sides right here, these aren't congruent. This has two tick marks, and this has one,but as I continue to wrap around, I do find that I have a pair over here, and a pair over hereA pair, two pair, of consecutive sides which are congruentNow we have to add this little extra in here that we don't have opposite sides which are congruentas well, because if we did, well, then we would be talking about a rhombusand not a kiteSo, there's a lot of properties other than this basic structure of a kitethat I'm not sure if my book is going to introduce later onbut, it kind of just gives us one theorem and then just starts going through examples.And then some of these properties I'm going to bring up are kind of quietly derivedor used in the text without, I don't think, really clarifying it enough.So, I'm going to do that for us here. The diagonals of a kite are going to be perpendicular.So we have a diagonal here connecting these two vertices,which are formed by the non-congruent sides, and we have a diagonal going this way.And these diagonals are going to be perpendicular, and they're not just going to be perpendicular.There's going to be some bisection going on.The diagonals from the vertices included between the non-congruent sides isor actually it would be the diagonal. The diagonal from the vertices included between the non-congruentsides is bisected by the diagonal from the vertices included between the congruent sides.I'm trying to write these using this math vocab that we have of "included," that means "formed."So, this diagonal that is connecting the vertices that are formed by the two sides which are not congruentis being bisected by the diagonal that is connecting or between the vertices that are formed bythe consecutive congruent sides. That's what I'm trying to say here. And I'm going to include a two column proofat the end of the video for this particular property. Now, I'm going to do that proof and we're also goingto have a couple, I think three, algebraic examples working with the sides and angles of these kitesin this video. But in the last two column proof, I'm going to prove that these two segments are congruent,but first I'm going to get the phone.Okay, sorry for the interruption.So, yes, this diagonal is going to get bisected. We're going to prove that later, using some congruent triangles.We can also see it, though. Just to kind of recall some old concepts and theorems and stuff,remember that if you have a point and this point is equidistant to the endpoints of another segmentthen that point is on a perpendicular bisector. I'm not going to use that property to do the proof.I'll leave that up to you or maybe your text book or to do in class. But, yeah, if you have a point that'sequidistant to the endpoints of another segment, then that point itself is on a perpendicular bisector.The opposite angles included or formed by, again, the non-congruent sides, are going to be congruent.I have a kite here. I have one diagonal drawn though here. I'm not going to do a proof of this, but I'lljust quickly talk about it. I mean, look how I have this diagonal drawn through our kite.We would be able to say with a very, very short proof, that this triangle and this triangle are congruentdue to side, side, and the reflexive property, a third side, these two triangles are congruent due to side-side-side.And these two angles, then, would be corresponding parts of congruent triangles, which arethemselves congruent. So, again, the angles formed by the non-congruent sides or included between thenon-congruent sides are always going to be congruent in a kite.The diagonal between the vertices that are included in the congruent sides or formed by the congruent sides,that diagonal, is going to bisect those opposite angles. Again, I can say that this angle is congruent to thisangle, if, in a proof, I have said that these two triangles are congruent, which they are, again, by side-side-side.So these two angles are going to be are going to be congruent due to corresponding parts of congruenttriangles which means that...let's use a different color here...that those two angles are going to be congruent.which makes this diagonal a bisector of this angle, and for the same reason these two angles are going to becongruent due to, again, corresponding parts of congruent triangles are congruent.So yes, the diagonal that connects or goes between the angles that are formed by the congruent sidesare going to bisect those opposite angles.So quite a few properties that are nice in kites."Nice" meaning we can come up with some good questions about you working outfinding measurements of missing angles and missing sides and so onand we are about  to do those right now.  We are going to do three examples, remember.Here are three examples.We've got a kite over here. Kite ABCD, we have a couple diagonals, and we want to find the measure of all theangles I've marked with these values of 1, 2, 3, and 4. The only information I'm giving us here is, of course,this is a kite with one and two pair of congruent sides and this angle right here angle ECD is 68 degrees,and we're going to use that to find the measurements of angles 1, 2, 3, and 4.Okay, well, the measure of angle 1 is very straightforward as long as you rememberthat the diagonals of a kite intersect in a...perpendicular fashion. So, the measure of angle 1 is equal to90 degrees. Okay, let's turn our attention to, let's say, angle 4. Now, I'm looking at this triangle, triangle ECD,and, of course, the interior sum of a triangle has to be equal to 180 degrees. So, within this triangle of ECD,we've got a 68 degree angle, we have a 90 degree angle, and whatever is left here for the measureof angle 4, must make these three angles inside this triangle add up to 180 degrees.So, the measure of angle 4...is going to be equal to 180 degrees minus the 90 that we have for angle 1.And another minus, taking out that 68 degrees we have here, and whatever is left over is our final answer.So we have 180 minus 90 is going to be 90 degrees. 90 degrees which is left after taking away this first 90.90 minus 60 is equal to 30, and 30 minus 8 is equal to 22 degrees....So, again, the measure of angle 4 is 22.So, if we know that the measure of angle 4 is 22 degrees, then we know what the measure of angle 3 is,because, remember, the angles that are formed by the congruent pairs: so this angle of ABC and here'sanother congruent set of sides, angle ADC. Those angles are bisected by the diagonal.So, whatever the measure of angle 4 is, that is the measure of angle 3. So the measure of angle 3...is also equal to 22 degrees.Now,...what is the measure of angle 2? Well, I don't have to do any more work to figure that out, either.Remember, let's see here, there's a couple ways to approach this. I think what I'm going to do here isremind you that we have two triangles in here and, remembering, of course, that our diagonals, again,intersect in a perpendicular fashion. So, we have triangle ADE and triangle CDE, those are bothgoing to be right triangles. And, not only are they right triangles, but they're also congruent right triangles.I can prove that this triangle here is congruent to this triangle because of hypotenuse-leg,and angle 2 is a corresponding angle to this angle in here that I have marked off as being 68 degrees.so if this is 68 degrees, then the measure of angle 2 is also equal to 68 degreesand again, I kind of like verbally just talked through a little proof there, right?reflexive property: ED is congruent to EDthat means that with hypotenuse-leg we have two right triangles which are congruentand the corresponding parts of congruent triangles are themselves congruentSo another little tidbit or example of why we stress,  in the beginning of geometry especiallythe use of the two-column proofs and building up this logic skilland of course, give you an opportunity to reinforce your memorizationof all these theorems and concepts and postulates and definitions that we are giving youbecause we are still doing them to solve these problemseven though we are not writing a two-column proof.Well, what have we got going on here?We have a kite again, and we are looking for the measures of angle 1 and 2.There's a few ways to do this. We can look...I think I want to look at this entire kite at once.Now, this kite, again a quadrilateral, right? It's got four sides. And we know that the interiorangles--the sum of the interior angles of a polygon is equal to the number of sides minus 2 times 180or (n - 2)*180. So I have four sides. Four minus 2 is 2 and 2 times 180 degrees is 360.So these four angles are going to add up to 360 degrees. Now you might think...Well, okay. But we have angle 1 and angle 2. It appears...if these are two, different, unknown values,then I can't make one equation to solve for them right off the bat. But we can because, remember,these angles are congruent. That was one of the properties I talked to you about in theprevious window.So, that means that this angle here, which is 90 degrees,...plusthis unknown value. And I think I'm just going to let this be x because both angle 1 and angle 2 have thesame measure in this kite. So it's going to be 90 plus 2 times x plus 42....So, again, I've taken one, two, three, four. I'm taking my four angles: one, two, and this additional two,which makes four, and I want to make sure that those add up to 360 degrees.So, we have 2x. We have like terms here on the left hand side, so we're going to add those:9 and 4 is 13, so 90 and 40 is 130. It's 132....Subtract both sides by 132, to undo that addition....And we have 2x....We have 360, we have 260, we have 230. Now we've got 228....And divide both sides by x, or, excuse me, 2. We're going to divide both sides by 2 to get the x alone....And x is equal to 114 degrees. If you want to make sure that you're right, make sure that 114 plus 114 plus 42plus 90 is equal to 360 degrees and you'll be good to go. I'm just going to look at my notes, and I'm in agreement!Excellent! Okay, so, for our last example, we're going to look at this kite over here.And we have a much more complicated scenario here. First of all, I'm not giving you any exact valuesof any of these angles and I want to solve for...let's just say, we'll solve for x and y.Actually, I could say solve for x and y, but we're going to have to actually know the measures of these angles,as well, to be able to solve this problem. So, we'll find the measures of the missing anglesas well as the unknown values.Well, we have, again, those angles that are formed by the consecutive, non-congruent sidesare going to be equal to themselves.Again, side, side and a shared side. Side-side-side shows that these two triangles are congruent.Corresponding parts of congruent triangles are congruent. So, we've got 2x...plus 10 is equal to 4x minus 90. We're going to solve this for x. We're going to bring this 2x over....I like to avoid the negatives, so I don't mind if my x is on the right hand side.We have 10 is equal to 2x - 90, add both sides by 90....You get 100 equals 2x...divide by 2...and x is equal to 50....And I'm going to run out of room, so I'm going to pause this video real quick.I'm going to take this value of 50.I'm going to plug it into each of these expressions. Actually, I can just fill that in here: 4 times 50 minus 90.4 times 50 is 200...minus 90...is 110 degrees.And if we plug 50 back up into here, we get 110 degrees, as well.So I'm going to erase this. I'm going to fill up these two angles with the information that they're 110 degreesAnd finish this example.Last example!We have a kite, kite ABCD. Very original name, I know.And we're told that AB is congruent to AD and that BC is congruent to DC.I actually could have just given you this information and had you draw the diagram on your own.Okay, I want to prove thatthis diagonal that connects the vertices created by the congruent sides...or included, bisects this diagonal BD.Now, we can also do a proof...there's a proof in my book about it being a perpendicular bisector and it is...but, I didn't want to do the exact same proof, that was already in the textbook.And you can see because it's a pretty simple one, too. I want to recall the...the knowledge that we learned about congruent trianglesand that corresponding parts of congruent triangles are congruent.I've mentioned that a couple times in this video already, as well.But just to reinfore the old concepts as well as the new ones. You can talk about these two diagonals beingperpendicular bisectors using the perpendicular bisector theorem...for segments.When you have a point which is an equal distance to the endpoints of that segment,then it is on the perpendicular bisector. And you can say,that A is on the perpendicular bisector, C is on the perpendicular bisector,thus, this is a perpendicular bisector...blah blah blah.But, I'm just going to state that it was...a property that I gave us.The first thing I said was that the diagonals were perpendicular, and then,I said this diagonal was bisected by this one, and that's what we are going to prove....Just using the fact that, for kites, our diagonals are perpendicular....So, again, how am I going to show that BD was bisected? Well, I'm going to show that it wasbisected by proving that E is the midpoint or that BE is congruent to ED. And we're going to do that byhighlighting or focusing on -- I can do it either side -- but I'm going to focus on these two triangles here...triangle...excuse me, CED and triangle CBEand show that those two...did I say that right?...CED and CEB...and show that those two triangles are congruent.So,...and then we're just going to do corresponding parts of congruent triangles are congruent.That'll show these two segments are congruent,and our proof is going to be done, which I kind of just did verbally for us anyway.So this will go pretty quickly.We've already had it stated that BC is congruent to DC. Now all I have to do is say thatfor these two blue triangles, that EC, which is shared between those two triangles, is congruent to itself.And then we're going to be able to say that these two......these two right triangles are going to be congruent...due to some theorem......that has a couple of letters in it's name, as an abbreviation......something about hypotenuse and something-something. So, let's get that up there.So, we have that reflexive property, I have my information marked, and, again,these two triangles are going to be congruent. When you have this perpendicular angle,which, I'm going to skip over the step of saying that's specifically a 90 degree angle or that those are...that's a right angle. We do have that these are right triangles, due to the fact that we have theseperpendicular lines. So, I'm kind of abbreviating this proof a little bit. How do you show that tworight triangles are congruent, with just a pair of congruent legs and a pair of congruent hypotenuses?Oh, I just said it. That's HL.Okay, so then BE is congruent to ED. These are corresponding parts of congruent trianglesand we know that they are, therefore, congruent, due to CPCTC.And that means that I've taken segment BD and cut it into two equal parts, which meansthat it's been bisected. And that's by, simply, definition of segment bisector.And that's the end of my proof. I'm Mr. Tarrou.Bam!Go do your homework!