So let's talk about the four color theorem!It's a favorite with mathematicians.It's easy to state,so the statement is, every map can be colored using four colors,such that two neighboring countries are different colors.That would be confusing if it wasn't.So all maps can be done in four colors.In other words I'm saying there are no maps that need five colors.It's not obvious,and you'd think more complicated maps would need more colors,but apparently all maps can be done with just four colors or better.So this problem was unsolved for a long time.125 years, it was unsolved.It was solved finally in the 1970s,although the method they used to solve it was a little controversial at the time,but has had a large effect on mathematics today.So the story of how this problem came around is kind of cute.Apparently there was a guy who was trying to color in the counties of Britain.I don't know why he was trying to do that, but he was,and he suspected he could do it using four colors.And he mentioned it to his brother, and his brother was a Maths student.And his brother mentioned it to his lecturer who was a man called Augustus De Morgan.He's a famous mathematician, and, well, it was De Morgan who spread this problem around.So to prove it,we either need to show that every map can be done with four colors or better,or we just need to find one example that needs five colors.So people were trying it.And if you try it with maps, it does work.If you try it with the map of the world, you can color it with four colors.If you try it with the map of the United States, you can do it with four colors.You can try any real map, you can do it with four colors.I mean you can get this problem to children, right, you want to keep them quiet.After a while, you start to think,"Well, maybe I'll need to invent a map.Maybe if I can invent a weird, complicated map,I can find one that needs five colors."So that's what you start to do -- doesn't look like any sort of real-life map.So we got this map, and now we're going to color it in.So let's start with the middle; I think orange.Next country has to be a different color, so I'm using the purple here.Let's try the next country;so this is all fairly simple -- I can't use purple, I can't use orange, because they're touching --I'll use the blue.Next one, uh, what do you want, what do you want, Brady?[Brady] Well, we can't use blue or orange...
[Dr. Grime] Mm.[Brady] Oh we could use purple again![Dr. Grime] Ah, wise. That is a wise choice.Let's use purple again.Why not? Let's not go to the expense of using a fourth color.So now let's do this one.[Brady] We can use blue again.[Dr. Grime] And we can use blue again for that one, excellent.That might put us in a good position when we do the next country.So here we've got --we can't use blue, we can't use purple; what should we use?[Brady] We can use orange again.
[Dr. Grime] We can use orange, why not?Uh, do you wanna use the orange on the opposite one?So we'll do this one in orange...[Brady] And now we need a fourth color.[Dr. Grime] We do need -- we have to go to the fourth color, do we?Yeah, yeah, yep, purple, blue and orange are being used;this does have to go into the fourth color.I've got pink here. On the opposite side, it's the same, obviously; I'll use pink over here.It looks like we had to use four colors for that.So okay, so this is a mapthat was solvable with four colors.Here's another important map. I'm gonna makeit like that. There's only fourcountries, but if we try and color it in,Uh, I'll do something similar. I'll dothe orange in the middle again, purple up here.Well this one can't be purple; itcan't be orange. That means it's blue and thiscountry it can't be orange; it can't bepurple; it can't be blue; so I'm forced touse the fourth color which is the pink.So this is an example of a map thatdefinitely needs four colors so we'regoing to boil the problem down a littlebit. Let's say I took this map again -- I'lldraw it here. Same map. Instead of coloring inall the sections, let's just say I colorin at the center of each region.That'll just get the same idea won't it? I don'thave to use all that ink. and maybeinstead of drawing out the whole mapmaybe if I just said if two countriesare touching each other, they share aborder. Right, I'll just connect them witha line. What I've made is I turn thatmap into a network so this map has madethis network and the question "Can thismap be colored using four colors orbetter?" is the same question of saying"can this network be colored using fourcolors or better such that two countriesthat are connected with a line are notthe same color?" So it kind of boils downthe problem; it makes it more abstractbut that's actually a good thing. itmakes it easier to solve, there arethings we can learn now about maps bystudying networks instead. So the reasonwe want to use networks; for a start, itshows when two maps are the same. I'llshow you what I mean. What about if I had amap that looks like this yeah so thisthis map looks like a handbag as Bradyjust told me, but if we draw the networkfor this map, so I'm just going to puta dot in each region and then I'llconnect them if they're connected likethis. You will find that you get the samenetwork as this previous map we did. Sojust 4 countries again, it gives me thesame network -- it is effectively the same mapeven though it looks different. So bystudying networks we can study all thedifferent kinds of maps even when theylook different. Now all maps makenetworks but not all network are validmaps. I'll show you what I mean this isnot going to be a valid map and I'mgoing to say they're all going to be touchingeach other. They're all mutually touchingcountries. They all share borders so itlooks like -- if I got this right -- looks likethat. Now this is not going to be a validmap, because if you try and turn thatinto a map it's not going to work. Theproblem is the lines cross which whenyou try and turn it into a map doesn'tmake sense. You can try but it justdoesn't make sense. It is allowed if wecan untangle the lines and that mighthappen. i'll show you what i mean so saythese are countries here and let's saythese countries touch each other as wellso i would connect them with a line, butif I do that you see the lines cross. Idon't have to do it that way: I couldhave drawn a line like that. So I couldhave untangled that. So if I can untangle itthat's fine. That's a valid map. And bystudying networks there are some featuresof maps that we can learn by looking atnetworks, this one in particular. In anymap you're going to have a country let'scall it A. Country A. Right, there's goingto be a country in every map that'seither just by itself,  like anisland, or country A is connected to oneother country; that might happen.Or country A is connected to two othercountries, so you'll get a network thatlooks like that. That'd be country Athere in the middle, or you might havecountry A which is connected to threecountries, this all seems perfectlyreasonable. That's A in the center. Country Acould be connected to 4 countries, (now put A in),or country A could be connectedto 5 countries. And that all seemsreasonable, but every map will have atleast one country that looks like one ofthese. What you can't have is everycountry connected to six other countriesor more. All I'm saying is there is atleast one country in that map that'seither connected to one, or two, or three,or four, or five. But if you have a mapwhere they're all mutually connected tosix or more countries, that's a networkthat can't be untangled. So all maps havethis feature one of the countries is oneof these on this list. Now we can starttalking about the four color theoremthis is actually going to be useful. So thefour color theorem is hard to prove andthey tried for a long time, like I saidit took 125 years. They did manage toprove easier versions of the four colortheorem. So the four color theorem meansthere are no maps that need five colors.I can probably prove that there are nomaps that need seven colors. That'sprobably easier to explain okay. I'mgoing to have a go. Okay imagine thereare maps that need seven colors. Theseare maps that can't be done with better,right, so there are maps that needseven. Pick the smallest one, okay, soyou've got a small one. Now, because it'sa map it's going to contain a countrywhich is going to be one of these A'sthat I've called here on this list. Sotake that country and pull it out, justdelete it, take it away. you've made asmaller map. Now, because it's a smallermap, that means you can do it in sixcolors. Do you remember, the map I had wasthe smallest that had to use seven? So ifI take a country away, smaller, I can doit with six, great. If I put my country Aback in, that means i have a spare colorto use for A.  I mean the worst casescenario is this last one here. and thesecould be all different colors. If Iput A back in I'm still going to have aspare color, a sixth color that i can use,which shows that the map can be done insix colors after all. Now to show thatall maps can be done with five colors --that's a little bit harder, the proof isexactly the same, the proof is exactlythe same except, in this worst-casescenario, down here at the end here umit becomes harder, because if those arefive different colors, and you put yourcountry A back in, you might have toreuse a color which you don't want to do.So the argument's a bit more complicated.you have to show that you can recolor it,and you still have a spare color for A.So it's a harder proof but it's alongthe same lines. Then, they try to do itwith four; can we show that all maps canbe done with four colors? And thatargument doesn't quite work. It justwasn't strong enough. So this wentunsolved for a long time. There were somepeople who thought they'd proved it. Theythought they'd actually done it andpeople accepted the proof, and theythought it was solved for a decade. Wethought "Oh! It's done." And then oh! They found amistake and when actually that doesn't holdup and then "Oh no, it wasn't proved."And we have to go back to square one, we haveto find a way to prove this problem. Soit took till the 1970s to solve thisproblem. So the final solution: it wasdone by two guys, Kenneth Appel andWolfgang Haken from the University ofIllinois.They did it in 1976. It's kind of similar to my proof Imentioned before. They made a list ofnetworks and they said, every map musthave at least one of these networkswithin it. And they showed that every mapcontains one of these networks. Each oneof those networks can be colored withfour colors or can be recolored withfour colors. And that -- that is enough toshow that every map can be done withfour colors. Now it is a hard proof and apart of the problem was having to showthat this list could be colored withfour colors because it was a long list.There were -- how many networks was on thislist? 1,938 [sic] networks, and to do that theyused a computer. And that wascontroversial at the time. This was thefirst computer assisted proof inmathematics. Now it's commonplace andlots of mathematics is done withcomputers, but this was the first, andpeople were wary of this proof. For astart, one of the problems is -- it involveschecking lots of cases. That's not thebest kind of proof. It is a proof and it isvalid, but the problem with that is itdoesn't give you a deeper understandingof why something is true: just checkinglots of cases. Mathematicians not -- do notnecessarily like that kind of proof; it'snot the best kind. But it's still a validproof. The proof has been improved forstarts, we had this long list of networksthat we had to show we could color in.That got shortened. I think it gotshortened to some like 1400 andsomething -- I think it's shorter now. I'mnot sure how short it is at the moment.At the moment though the proof stillrequires this massive checking of cases,so it's still not a beautiful proof.This episode has been brought to you bySquarespace; get ten percent off yourfirst order with them by going tosquarespace.com/numberphile. Now I useSquarespace pretty much every day tomaintain all sorts of things, from myblog, online store, and all sorts ofother websites -- it's a great all in one setup for everything right from buying yourdomain name at the start through todesigning the page itself, I've got allthese award-winning templates, they'rereally good, but you can tweak them asyou see fit, of course, and importantlythese sites look equally good oncomputers or mobile devices, it's alltaken care of for you, so whatever yournext move is online Squarespace is goingto make it so much easier and also lookmuch more professional, give them a look.It really doesn't matter what you'redoing these days, whether it's just sortof a CV type site or some kind of shop,you really need a classy onlinepresence and that's what you're going toget here, go to squarespace.com/numberphileand check them out. You caneven do a free trial before committingand remember to use numberphile to getten percent off your first purchasesquarespace.com/numberphile or you canuse the code "numberphile". Thanks to themfor supporting this video.