Welcome to another Mathologer video. Todayi'll talk about these crazy expressionshere. Now in school they tell you that if youdon't stay away from these eternaldamnation awaits. And that's actually apretty good rule to pass on to themasses to prevent them from suiciding butif you actually stop there a lot ofmodern mathematics is not possible. Solet me explain this a little bit.Alright, so why do they tell tell you thatyou can't divide 3 by 0 or that 0 / 0 isundefined?Well let's have a look at something thatnobody has a problem with --- 3/8. So inmaths 3/8 actually just stands for theone and only solution of this simpleequation there 8 times x is equal to 3.Ok, so let's change 8 to a 0 and see what happens.Well we are immediately in trouble here becauseno number satisfies this equation.The equation will always be 0 is equal to3 which is wrong. So it sort of makessense to stay away from something likethis, right? And so what about 0/0? Well adifferent problem comes up here. Everysingle number actually satisfies thisequation so there is also trouble.Let's stay away from it. So for mostpeople that's all they really need toknow but now if we had stopped there inmathematics there would actually be nocalculus and nobody would know IsaacNewton. That would be really sad right?Ok, so what's calculus about? Calculus is allabout derivatives and integrals. Here Ihave drawn a nice function and we wantto find the derivative of this functionat a certain value. Now you all know thatthis stuff is incredibly important butit has a really simple geometricalinterpretation. The interpretation is thederivative here is just the slope ofthis touching line. Now just reading offfrom the function it's not clear whatthat slope should be. Wow what's easy tocalculate is actually the slope of acutting line like this. And thenthe idea is that if I move these two points ofintersection togetherthen the more they come together thecloser the cutting line will be to thetangent line and the closer the slopes ofthe cutting lines will be to the slopethat I'm really interested in.Ok now how do I actually calculate theslope of the cutting lines?Well you can just immediately read offwhat the height here is and what the width isand then we get the slope, just height divided bywidth,  pretty obvious. But now seewhat happens when i move the two pointstogether. Both the height and widthapproach zero, so overall the slopeapproaches this forbidden 0/0. But nownothing really terrible happens, right, youwould expect something terrible to happenbut nothing terrible happens.We are justgetting closer and closer to this slopeof the touching line. That seems a bitstrange but just remember that equationthat corresponds to 0/0 has allnumbers as solutions so what reallyhappens here is that we've establisheda context, a very narrow context in which0/0 kind of makes sense as oneparticular number and you can see thatas the context changes we get differentnumbers. So let's have a look at aspecific example. Let's calculate thederivative of x squared at 1/2.  Alright wehave to see here what's the width here and what's theheight. Width call it  w  so that givesus a second value. Now we evaluate thefunction at these two values. That givesus 1/2 squared and 1/2 plus wsquared. Now the height is of course thedifference between the two so that one here.Expand the top, notice that these twothings cancel out and you've got theheight and with the heightwe've got the slope and you can see theslope really what does it do at the topit goes to 0 at the bottom it goes to 0but as long as we staying off 0 we canactually cancel the w and what thisgives us this nice expression here andjust by looking at that it's completelyobvious what the limit of thisexpression is as w approaches 0. That'sthe slope we are after.This means that the derivative of xsquared at 1/2 is equal to 1,isn't this neat.  Now 1/2 was actually notvery special here. We could have used anyinitial value here and if we did that wewould find that the derivative of xsquared is 2x.  So once we've got thatwe've got this whole thing under controlas far as calculus is concerned.Alright so we write this like that incalculus books and actually if you havea really close look you also find thatthe 2 was nothing special. Wecould have done the same thing for 3and you should really try this, or 4or for 5 or just in general for anypositive integer, not a big deal. And nowwe just run with the scheme and make upa huge table of derivatives for allsorts of functions that we are interestedin. And so you have it in a nutshellcalculus courtesy of 0/0, pretty neat isn't it.So really that apple that hit Newton there atsome point in time and made him inventedcalculus was definitely a 0/0.Before we go on and maybedon't believe anything I said so farlet's just ask our smartphone what 0/0 is.So Siri ...That's fun but now I also promised youall of these guys. It is very importantto make sense of these and actually it'sdone in a calculus book in the chapter on"indeterminate forms" and if you lookthere you find that these slope quotientsthat we had a look at so far are actuallyjust a special incarnation of this sortof setup.  So you have a quotient of twofunctionsg and h depending on a variable, in thiscase t. And as the variable approaches acritical value both g and approach 0.Whenever you get something like thishappening then you say that the quotienttakes on the indeterminate form 0/0 atthe critical value and actually just hereI better say thecritical value can also be infinity sot can also go off to infinity.What makes this whole thingindeterminate, well, by just looking at theinformation we've got so far it's not a allclear what the quotient does as weapproach the critical value. It could goto a specific value, it could go toinfinity or it could do nothingreasonable. On the other hand, you know ifyou were to consider the product youdon't have to know anything about g and hexcept that they both go to 0 toconclude that the product will go to 0and even Siri knows about indeterminate.So if you ask about any of those strangeexpressions that i showed you Siri willtell you they're all indeterminate. Solet's have a look at an example, 1 to thepower of infinity. Infinity andI really have to say this,  inelementary calculus never stands foranything like a number. It always standsfor some sort of function or processthat goes to infinity. The same sort ofthing here. Both 1 and infinity actuallystand for functions, the first oneapproaches 1, the second one approachesinfinity as t goes to a critical value.And this is also indeterminate meaningthat if you don't know exactly whatyou're talking, about which g and whichh you're talking about, the g to thepower of h could approach any sortof finite value or it could go toinfinity or it could go anywhere youwant.Ok so here's a really famous example ofsomething like this: (1+1/t)^tSo here the criticalvalue is actually infinity. So t getsbigger and bigger and as t gets bigger andbigger this 1/t will approach0 and so the whole orange bit willapproach 1 and of course the exponentwill approach infinity and it's reallyreally important to say that you can'tdo first one limit and then the otherone. Tt's really the speeds at which oneexpression goes to 1 and the otherexpression goes to infinity thatdetermine the behavior of the wholeexpression. In this case it approachesthis value here, very famous, it's thebase of the natural logarithm, e, andthere is a whole video that I've done aboutthis indeterminate form. Maybe watch itagain after you finish with this video.And so we have a look at this and youthink that well to make sense of all ofthese strange expression you haveto invent a lot of different sorts ofmathematics. But it actually turns out thatall of these expressions and that comesreally comes as a surprise to many many peopleare just 0/0 in disguise. So all of theseexpressions can be reduced to just theconsideration of 0/0. I just want to showyou how that works for 1 to the power ofinfinity. So again that just correspondsto this. Now this whole thing is equal toe ^ .....And now we're dealing with alogarithm so we can pull the exponentin front of the logarithm, like that.g goes to 1. Now ln(1) is 0. This meansthat this whole thing here goes to 0.h goes to infinity but we can also writethe whole exponent here in this formand then the 1/h actually goesto 0. So what we've done now is basicallyreduce 1 to the power of infinity to 0/0  :)Pretty neat, right, and you can do thisfor all the other ones. So far, apart fromthis very, very simple x squared examplewe haven't actually figured out anyother expressions. How do you actually dothis in practice. What I've tried to push here isthat the apple that hit Newton was really a0/0 apple. The 0/0 applemakes calculus but you can also go theother way around. Once you've gotcalculus you can actually hit 0/0with it.How does that work? Well that's a bit ofmagic and its called l'Hopital's Rule. Sohere is an indeterminate form 0/0 at 1.So, if we let t go to 1, boththe top and the bottom go to 0 andnow how would you actually figure outwhere the whole expression goes to. Youcould try and evaluate this at ts thatare very close to 1 t,hat's a perfectlyfine strategy but there's actually areally nice shortcut. So what you do isyou take the top and find the derivativeand you take the bottom and find thederivative. So the derivative of the topis 1/t and thederivative of the bottom is just 1 and wewill see what happens to this expressionas t approaches the critical value.Of course nothing terrible happens here atall,  this just becomes 1, right? And now ifthe functions that we're dealing withhere are nice, differentiable, check outthe details in a calculus textbook, then wecan actually conclude at this stage thatwhat we're really interested in alsogoes to 1. A really really nice trick.So, overall, what we've seen is that tomake sense of 0/0 in calculus just meanssetting a special kind of context andsneaking up on the zeros. The samesort of thing if you want to make senseof 3/0. You also do this by sneaking upon 0 and of course you know thatthings explode magnitudewise and, youknow, you can make sense of this in thisway. But that's not the end of it allSo in higher levels of calculus itactually makes sense to treat infinitylike a number and to actually writeequations like 3/0 is equal to infinity andyou really mean it.So these things don't stand for any kindof functions they really stand for, youknow, 3 as a number divided by 0 as anumber is equal to infinity (sort of) as anumber. In other branches of mathematicsyou sometimes find that it actually does makesense to set 0/0 equal to 1. But that'sa topic for another video, so let'sjust leave it at that.