Welcome to another Mathologer video A
squared plus B squared equals C squared.Forget about Euler's formula and company,
Pythagoras's theorem beats them all injust about every conceivable way, at
least in my books. Ok so finally aMathologer video about THE theorem
of theorems. My main mission today is tochase down the all-time greatest,
simplest, no-brainer proof of Pythagoras'stheorem, just for you. At the same time,
I'll introduce to some truly gorgeouscrazy and divine Pythagorean facts off
the beaten track. And to finish off thevideo I'll tell you a little bit about a
new book by me and Marty that's justappeared. Before we get started with the
maths let's do a little debunking.Pythagoras's theorem is a misnomer. The
basic fact about right-angled trianglesnamed after Pythagoras was not
discovered by Pythagoras at all and wasactually known to the ancient
Babylonians at least a thousand yearsbefore Pythagoras was born. Also, although it's often claimed that Pythagoras wasthe first to have produced a rigorous
proof of this theoremthere actually does not seem to exist any
evidence to support this claim, andplenty of maths historians doubt it. Now
Pythagoras was the leader of a veryinfluential mathematical cult, the
Pythagoreans, who were in the habit ofattributing all results originating with
them to Pythagoras himself and it'slikely that because of this practice
Pythagoras's name came to be attached tothe theorem. Anyway it's too late now,
it's all gone, and so I'll also call THEtheorem Pythagoras's theorem or simply
Pythagoras. Okay let's get started bylooking at a couple of gorgeous proofs
of Pythagoras's theorem. Here's my take andone of the simplest, most beautiful and
most popular. Let's make four copies of aright-angled triangle with short sides A
B and hypotenuse C. Now we arrange thesethe four triangles in a square which at the
same time creates a smaller tiltedsquare inside.
So the small square is what you get whenyou partially cover this big blue square
by the triangles. The small square hassides of length, what? Well, the length is
just the length of the hypotenuse of ourtriangle which is C and so the area of
the small square is equal to C squared.Let's shift one of the triangles. Now how
large is the modified blue area that yousee here. Well, the triangle covers just as muchblue as before and so the new blue area
is just as large as before, C squared.Let's do some more shifting. How large is
the new blue area? Well, obviously, still Csquared, right? Now comes the punchline.
Shift again. Obviously the blue area isstill C squared. However, it's also A
squared plus B squared and so A squaredplus B squared equals C squared.
Super neat isn't it :) Now it all seemspretty convincing, but it's definitely
important to stress that for thisargument to count as a bulletproof
proof we'd have to check some moredetails. For example, in this diagram here
we need to check that the two squarelooking shapes are really squares no
matter what right triangle we start with.Not hard but not a step we can afford to
skip. After all, looks can be deceiving,that's as true in maths as it is in life.
Just to give you an idea what a morecomplete proof looks like, let me show
you a proof of Pythagoras's theorem in themost famous maths textbook ever written,
the 2,000+ year old Elements by theancient Greek mathematician Euclid.
Here's a translation. Whoa what happenedhere. It just looked very neat, didn't it,
but no now it's really prettyoff-putting isn't it? And actually also
pretty hard to understand, just based onthis diagram and the text. On the other hand,
we can also capture the gist of thisclassic proof (2,000 years and still
going strong) with a pretty animation. Nowif Euclid had an animation, it's been
lost sohere's mine :) So Euclid proves Pythagoras
by showing that the two orange figureshave the same area, and the same for the
two blue figures. Then we've got orangeplus blue on top which is A squared plus
B squared is equal to orange plus blueat the bottom which is C squared. Here's
my take on Euclid's argument. The littleorange square is what you get when you
cover this larger orange region by thiswhite copy of our right-angled triangle.
Then shifting the triangle as beforedoes not change the area, right? The same
can be done with the blue square. Let'sdo it. Now the orange parallelogram is
just this larger orange figure hereafter being covered by the little red
triangle and shifting the triangle thearrow stays unchanged again and the same
with the blue parallelogram. And withpretty much the same diagram as before
materialising we are done. There's the Csquared again and it is now also clear
that the orange and blue squares westarted with are equal in size to these
orange and blue rectangles. Over themillennia, hundreds of different proofs
of Pythagoras's theorem have been foundand there's even a book that lists 371
of them. And that's definitely 371 morethan most people know:)  That's the book.
I've got about 20 of the most beautifulproofs memorised. (Marty) Really? (Burkard) Really 20. at
least :) Let me now show you another of mymy favourites. Here's our A-B-C triangle again.
Let's scale it up by a factor C. The newtriangle has sides AC, BC and CC. We now
scale another copy of the originaltriangle by B. Okay let's do it. Right, and
one more copy of the triangle, we scalethat one by A, there we go. Now let's have
a close look and so what we see is thatthese two sides are the same. And so are
these other two. And this means that thethree triangles fit together into a
rectangle like this and so A squaredplus B squared equals C squared.
Absolutely gorgeous, isn't it and there arelots and lots of other proofs that are
just as beautiful as the ones I've shownyou. For example, you should check out the
proofs discovered by Leonardo da Vinciand the one discovered by American
President Garfield. If you're keen tofind out more there's no need to dig up
the book I mentioned earlier. Insteadhave a look at the nicely Illustrated
list of about 120 proofs on theabsolutely amazing cut-the-knot website.
So there I am just scrolling really quick.Oh, just in case the current American
president Donald Trump ever tweets hisown proof please someone let me know
immediately :) Alright, all thoseproofs that I've shown you so far are
great but none of them is the simplest. Iknow that this will sound very strange
but the simplest proof for Pythagoras'stheorem is a proof of a very very
general super theorem that featuresPythagoras theorem as just one of
infinitely many special cases. So whatI'm saying is that proving the general
theorem which comprises infinitely manyspecial cases is easier than proving
Pythagoras's theorem which is just oneof these special cases. Super weird,
well we'll see. Now what's this supertheorem? Well Pythagoras says that if we
attach three suitably scaled copies of asquare in the same way to the sides of a
right-angled triangle, then the two smallersquares together equal the larger square.
It turns out, and that's the supertheorem, that the same is true if we
replace the squares by any other shape.For example, the areas of the little semicircles add exactly to the area of thelarge one, the areas of the little
pentagon's add exactly two the area ofthe large one, and so on.
That's Pythagoras Pythagoras :)That the super theorem is true
actually follows from Pythagoras's theorem.To see this, let's just focus on the semicircles and the squares. It's clear thatevery one of the semicircles occupies
the same fraction of the correspondingsquare, in fact a quick pi calculation,
and that's an exercise for you, showsthat every one of the semicircles has
about 39 percent of the area of thecorresponding square. But since the two
smaller squares add to the larger square0.39 times the smaller squares adds to
0.39 times the larger square, like that,and that's the same as saying that the
two smaller semicircles add to thelarge semicircle. So Pythagoras for
squares implies Pythagoras for semicircles.But, using exactly the same
argument, it also follows that Pythagorasfor squares implies Pythagoras for all
other shapes. In fact, even stronger andagain using exactly the same argument,
Pythagoras for any shape whatsoeverimplies Pythagoras for all other shapes.
Now just to make sure that there's nomisunderstanding what I mean by this, let
me rephrase what I just said: if we canprove from scratch that Pythagoras is
true for some special shape, then thisproof implies immediately that
Pythagoras is true for all other shapes.How amazing is that.
But this insight then prompts a naturalquestion: Is there one best, super-terrific perfect shape for which it'seasiest to see that Pythagoras is true,
It turns out there is. Have a look atthis. Wait for it... DONE, that's the easiest
proof of Pythagoras. Now just in case youthink I've gone crazy note that you're
actually looking at three triangles andnot just two, okay,
and that the two smaller ones obviouslyadd to the larger one, AND that 
the three triangles are similar becausethey have the same angles, AND that they
attach a la Pythagoras to the originalred triangle like this. Really done.
There, the simplest proof of Pythagorasusing the simplest imaginable shape, the
right-angled triangle itself. Prettybloody amazing, as we say Down Under :)
Definitely something for real mathsconnoisseurs to savor. Okay before we get
into Pythagorean super facts here's alittle puzzle for you. You go to a pizza
shop and as usual they have small, mediumand large pizzas. It turns out that one
small plus one medium together costexactly the same as one large pizza. Now,
using only a pizza knife decide which isthe better deal,
the smaller plus medium combo or thelarge pizza by itself? Leave your answer
in the comments and while you are at it alsolet me know which of the proofs of
Pythagoras you like best.Now Pythagoras is great but it only
works for right-angled triangles. Whatabout other triangles. Well there's also
a really nice generalisation ofPythagoras hidden in school mathematics
that applies to all triangles. For thislet's have another look at Euclid's
proof. It turns out that equality ofareas of the same colour in this diagram
generalises to other triangles like this.So in this diagram any two rectangles of
the same colour are equal. Now with alittle trigonometry the proof is quite
simple. Let me just show you how you cansee that the two green rectangles really
have the same area. So we just label thesides A,B, C and the angle opposite C gamma.
Then you can read straight off thisdiagram here that the two green
rectangles both have area A times B timescos gamma, yet another exercise
for you, you'll be very busy today :)And so the green rectangles have equal
area and with that insight we get the sumof the top two squares A squared plus B
squared minus the two green bits, sominus two times A B cos gamma equals C
squared.Of course most of you will have encountered
this Pythagoras under the name Cosinerule.
So, in the case that the angle is 90degrees cos is zero and the cosine rule
turns into standard Pythagoras. When itcomes to the cosine rule the next best
triangle angles beside 90 degrees are 60and 120 degrees.
Why? Because cos 60 is 1/2 and cos120 is -1/2. For example, for 60
degrees the cosine rule takes on thisparticularly nice form and for 120 degrees
we get a plus sign. There, almost aspretty as the 90 degree Pythagoras, and
who knows maybe in a world of giant beesin which the hexagon's 120 degree angles
dominate this is THE Pythagoras :) Anywayhere's another little puzzle for you. One
remarkable thing about Pythagoras is theexistence of Pythagorean triples.
These are triples of positive integersA, B, C such that A squared plus B squared
equals C squared, like, for example, 3squared plus 4 squared equals 5 squared.
How about the 60 and 120 degreePythagoras. Can you find non-trivial
positive integer triples ABC thatsatisfy these other two Pythagorean
equations? People always think that sincePythagoras has been around for thousands
of years they know everything worthknowing and there's nothing new to be
discovered about it. WRONG! New proofs andfascinating Pythagorean facts are
still being discovered and there's somuch beautiful stuff that hardly anybody
has heard of. For example Marty and I justrecently discovered a proof of
Pythagoras's theorem that seems to be new.(Marty) Really? (Burkard) Yeah, actually that was new to me too
but actually if you look at thecut-the-knot site in the list there's
a proof by us and I had a look: yeah,actually, what we did there amounts to a
new proof :) Anyway it's there. Anyway,to finish off here's just a little
gallery of really interestingPythagorean flavored theorems that will
culminate in my all-time favourite inthis respect de Gua's theorem. So A
squared plus B squared equals C squaredbut if this height here is D then 1 over
A squared plus 1 over B squared equals 1over D squared. Hands up, who knew that? (Marty) My hand was down. (Burkard)
Well it's really easy to prove, giveit a try. Now theorem 2. This one works
for arbitrary triangles. Drawing theseconnections here X, Y, Z, then X
squared plus Y squared plus Z squared isequal to A squared plus B squared plus C
squared ... times 3 :) and every single one ofthese new green triangles here has the
same area as the red one we started with.Not easy to prove but feel free to give
it a try anyway. Theorem 3. Suppose we hadstarted with an A-B-C right-angled
triangle and then throw squares on thesides of the green triangles like this.
Then the yellow square is equal to Csquared and 5 times the yellow square
is equal to the sum of the 2 orangesquares. Pretty amazing :) Why 5? Why, anything nice?
And we can keep on going. Adding the pinksquares here the sum of the two small
pink squares is equal to the large pinksquare. How unexpected and how pretty is
that and there seem to be many similarrelationships to be discovered if we
keep extending this way. Ok now to reallyfinish off let me tell you about higher-dimensional counterparts of Pythagoras'stheorem. The first counterpart many of
you will be familiar with. To begin let'srestate Pythagoras in terms of
rectangles. In a rectangle with sides Aand B and diagonal C, well A squared plus B squaredequals C squared. This version of
Pythagoras has one straightforwardcounterpart in 3d where we replace the
rectangle with a rectangular box likethis. Now if its sides are A, B, C and its
diagonal is D then A squared plus Bsquared plus C squared equals D squared.
And this works in all dimensions. So fora 4d box with sides A, B, C, D and diagonal E
we've got a squared plus B squared plus Csquared plus D squared equals E squared.
Okay most of you would know this but didyou know that there is a second totally
different and totally crazy way in whichPythagoras generalizes to all higher
dimensions. It is called de Gua's theoremand the 3d version was only discovered
in the 18th century by the mathematicianJean-Paul de Gua de Malves. To motivate it we interpret this right angle triangle aswhat we get when we cut a corner of a
rectangle like that. In 3d cutting offthe corner of our box we get this.
That's a triangular pyramid with the redcut forming the base of this pyramid and
we've also got three faces that are allright-angled triangles. Now if A, B and C
are the areas, so no longer distances, sothe areas of the right angled triangles
and D is the area of the red base, thende Gua's theorem says that A squared
plus B squared plus C squared equals Dsquared. I absolutely love this one. I
find it so surprising that this shouldwork for squared areas instead of
squared distances and not only in 3d butalso in all higher dimensions where
what's squared are volumes and hypervolumes. I often assign the easy proof of
the 3d facts in assignments at uni somaybe you'd like to try your hand at
this one too. As I said, lots and lots andlots of homework for you today. Again
these are just some examples of tons ofstunning Pythagorean facts. If you
enjoyed this video make sure to alsocheck out some of the links in the
description and in particular thecut-the-knot list of proofs which also containsMarty my new proof of Pythagoras. And
that's it for todayexcept I also wanted to tell you about a
new book by me and Marty which has justbeen published by the American
Mathematical Society. For about eightyears Marty I wrote a weekly maths
column for one of the big newspapershere in Australia and this book is a
collection of 64 of these articles allwith an Australian theme. The book has
come out really really nice, it's in fullcolor, looks great and so if you like the
videos here's an opportunity to bridgethe time between videos and to find out
about the prehistory of the Mathologer. Ingeneral have a look at www.qedcat.com that's Marty's and my website for all thingsmathematical, especially our mathematical
Movie Database our mathematical movieclip collection, our other books, articles
etc. And that's really finally it for today.