BAM!!! Mr. Tarrou. Let's do some more proofs.
Ok, we have the tangent squared x over secantof x is equal to secant minus cosine. How
are we going to deal with this power of twoon the left hand side? You are not going to
prove this identity if you can't get the degreesto be the same. We can't divide it way, we
can't square root it away because those twofunctions require that you have to work with
both sides of the identity. So what to do?I don't know. You can, at this point... Remember
these are proofs, not here is five steps andfollow them in the right order to get the
right answer. I am going to try something,if you don't like it then try something else.
Maybe you will do the proof quicker than me,maybe I will do the proof quicker than you.
You know what, if the two sides match thenwho cares. Just as long as the algebra is
correct all the way through it. So, I seethis one...or this one tangent squared x and
I don't see any tangent functions on the righthand side. So, I am going to take out tangent
squared x and one of our identities is 1 plustangent squared x equals secant squared x.
I am going to use that Pythagorean identityto rewrite the numerator and I am going to
bring this one over to the other side andI am going to write tangent squared x is equal
to secant squared x minus 1. Now you firststep may have been to write this as sine over
cosine and this as one over cosine to startwith and that might be perfectly just fantastic.
Maybe it is going to be a good proof. Butthat is what I have done first. Now I am looking
at my problem and I still have a degree oftwo where over all I have is degrees of one.
I don't see any way of canceling anythingout. Remember you CANNOT cancel terms. My
students like to something like, "Can't thesecants cancel out?" Canceling this secant
out with this secant would be like sayingthat this is ok. (4 + 9) over 4 My kids might
be recognizing this if they are watching ittonight...right!? So could I cancel these
fours? I have a common thing on the top andbottom of this fraction, but it is a common
term. If I cancel out the fours, four dividedby four is equal to one. The last time I checked
one plus nine which is ten does not equalwhat is really four plus nine over four. Four
plus none is thirteen, the denominator isfour, and the last time I checked thirteen
over four is not equal to ten. You cannotcancel out terms!!! YOU HEAR ME? ARE YOU PAYING
ATTENTION!!! Ok:) Good. Now if it were multiplicationyou could cancel out. You can factors, but
you cannot cancel terms. That is not goingto cancel away. So what else is going on?
Well this is one term, a fraction bar is agrouping symbol. We have one term on the left
and two terms on the right. How can we takethe fraction and break it up into two parts?
Well, it has two terms in the numerator sowhat you have is a subtraction of two fractions
with a common denominator. You don't believeme? How about 4/3 minus 1/3? You have a common
denominator so don't you just subtract thenumerators and write the common denominator
once? Yeah you do! So what I am going to dois, I am going to take secant square minus
one and split it those terms up and give eachone their own fraction with a common denominator
of secant. We have got secant squared x oversecant minus one over secant. I am getting
excited because NOW I can cancel the secantsout because this is secant times secant over
secant. Secant times secant, with two thingsare being multiplied together then they are
factors and not terms. So this one secantin the bottom will cancel out with one of
the two secants on top, and you can think..whenyou divide like bases you subtract the exponents
as well. We get secant minus, one over secant...oneover secant is a reciprocal function...yeah
you are right, that is cosine x and that ismatch!!! WHOO! Alright, going on to the next
one. Okie dokie. So the next proof we aregoing to look at or the next identity we are
going to try and verify is the cosine of negativetheta over one plus the sine of negative equals
the secant of theta plus the tangent of theta.Well in this particular proof, or identity,
that we are going to verify my angle measuresare not the same. Now they are very close,
but they are not equal. Instead of theta wehave negative theta so we have opposite angles.
Now we need to talk about a chapter 1 conceptin my book. You might remember it from the
previous video if you are watching these insequence, we need to discuss the idea of even
and odd functions. Cosine, the cosine graphstarts on the y axis at 1 and falls in both
directions. The cosine graph is symmetricto the y axis which means that if you put
in opposite x's you get out the same y value.So, cosine is an even function. If you are
not sure what even functions are, or odd functions,you will need to go back and review that concept.
You have already covered in your class ifyou are doing PreCalculus. The cosine of an
angle is equal to the cosine of that oppositeangle. It is an even function. So the cosine
of negative theta is equal to the cosine oftheta. Cosine again is symmetric to the y
axis so it is even. Where as sine is not symmetricto the y axis. Sine has origin symmetry. If
you were to take a look in book for a parentfunction of sine and turn you book 180 degrees,
you know what the difference is...all of thenumbers are upside down and besides that nothing!
Sine is an odd function and that means thatwhen you plug in an opposite angle, so I want
to write this as the sine of theta not negativetheta... So I am going to plug in an opposite
angle. When you plug in opposite values, youget out opposite answers. The sine of negative
theta is going to be the opposite of the sineof positive theta. So if I plug in an opposite
value, I am going to get out an opposite answer.Alright? So now we have got our two sides
matching. And I am going to stop working withthe left hand side because sine and cosine
are the building block trig functions. Thereis nothing else I can do, well I guess I could,
but I am going to try and simplify insteadof making these more complicated. I am going
to write secant and tangent in terms of sineand cosine and hopefully something nice happens.
Let's see what happens...SHALL WE!!! So secantis one over cosine of theta. Oh, I have got
to just laugh at my own joke, that is terrible.Tangent is sine over cosine. What is worse
is that it was not really a joke. Now we havecommon denominators. So, on this side we have
got one plus sine of theta over cosine theta...hmm. Well, now both sides have the building
block trig core functions and wow... I don'tknow. Do you all have an ideas? Yeah.. Ok.
I like that idea. We have got one minus sineon the right side of the proof...right side?
I have got one minus sine on the bottom ofthe fraction on the left side of my identity.
Let's start working with the right side. Ihave got more room and I think I am going
to need a few more steps. Thank you for thesuggestion;) I want a one minus sine in this
fraction. Now I just said that you cannotmove things over from one side of this equation,
excuse me identity, to the other. So I amnot going to multiply both sides by one minus
sine theta because that would be moving itfrom one side to the other. But what I am
going to do is multiply this fraction by one.Just a funny looking one. I am going to multiply
it by one minus sine theta over one minussine theta. That is one right? See I multiplied
it by one, right? Ok, what happens? Well,this is what happens. We are going to have
one times one. One times negative sine andpositive sine times one. Then we have a positive
sine times negative sine. This is a differenceof squares pattern. So when I distribute these
I am going to get 1 times 1 is 1. Then I amgoing to get positive sine and negative sine
and those are going to cancel out. And positivesine and negative sine is negative sine squared
theta all over cosine theta times one minussine theta. I am not going to distribute this
stuff together because I need to do some canceling.See that power of two that is showing up.
I am going to do some kind of canceling tomake it match this left hand side. So I am
if I leave the denominator in factored form,that is going to save me some work. My numerator
is full of the sine function and this numeratoris only cosine. I am not going to get these
to match if I don't get the top of the fractionsto have the same trig functions in them. So
the first Pythagorean theorem that says sinesquared plus cosine squared equals one, if
the angles are the same...I should be probablynot be leaving theta out, says if I take one
minus sine squared theta and substitute usingthat first pythagorean identity...one minus
sine square theta is equal to cosine squaredtheta. Now look. We have one term on top and
it is cosine. I have one term on top and itis cosine squared. I have a one minus sine
on the bottom, and I have a one minus sineon the bottom. We are sooooo close! Oh, I
can cancel these factors out. One of thosecosines on the bottom, that factor...it is
multiplied to something else and not added,that cosine on the bottom is going to cancel
with one of the two cosines on top. LOOK ATTHERE! Cosine theta over one minus sine theta.
Is that a match? Is that a match? YEAH ITIS!!! Alright, let's do another one. I love
this stuff. You just have to try differentthings, do some different substitutions, and
then all of a sudden the algebra starts going...hey...hey...hey... aren't you getting close
to the answer. We have got one plus cosecanttheta over secant theta minus cotangent of
theta equals cosine. Now I have a lot goingon in the left hand side. Work your way down
the tree and you will land or come down thatone trunk. Don't make it more complicated.
Don't try and make this one term into twoterms and somehow add in cotangents and secants
from just the simple cosine function. So startwith the left and figure it out. I only have
cosine. I don't have cosecants, secants, orcotangent so I am going to rewrite the left
hand side in terms of sine and cosine rightoff the bat. We have one plus one over sine
theta all over one over cosine theta minuscotangent which is cosine over sine. Now,
that looks worse. We are going to have tostart cleaning up this first fraction and
see if anything nice happens with this secondfraction when we are done. We are going to
find a common denominator between one andsine and that is going to be sine. So we are
going to multiply this by sine theta on thetop and bottom. We have a common denominator
now so I am going to do sine theta plus oneover sine all over cosine theta minus cosine
theta over sine theta. Now this bottom fractionis going to get flipped up and we are going
to get, and this is going to sit here, weare going to get sine theta plus one over
sine and the cosine got flipped up...oops.I mis-copied it. That was one over cosine
theta, sorry about that. That is going toget flipped up and be sine theta plus one
times cosine over sine. Again, this bottomgets flipped up. The second fraction already
has a sine in the denominator. Now look. Wehave got sine theta plus one times cosine
minus cosine over sine and our final goalis to have nothing but cosine left. If I take
out the cosine from these two terms becausethese are going to come together as one big
fraction. Let me just write it like that sincewe have a common denominator of sine. These
two terms both have a cosine, so if I takethat cosine and I factor it out... Sine plus
one times cosine with the cosine out is goingto be sine theta plus one. And if I take the
cosine out of this term, cosine again dividedby cosine is one but it is minus one all over
sine. Well I am running out of room be weare also almost done. One minus one is zero.
Now we have cosine times sine over sine oftheta. I almost made a mistake, but we did
finish in time. BAM! The sines cancel outand we get the cosine of theta. Which now
that I am in a hurry I am making a coupleof mistakes here, let me fill that back in.
BAM!!! Cosine theta from the left equals cosinetheta from the right. I am Mr. Tarrou. Go
do your homework:D