Hi, this is Presh Talwalkar. In this video
we're going to talk about extending thefactorial function beyond the whole
numbers and described the gamma function.For a brief refresher, the factorial
function is a way to count the number ofarrangement of objects in a line.It's often written with an exclamation
point (!).So 1 factorial is 1; 2 factorial is 2
times 1, which is 2; 3 factorial is 3...times 2 times 1, which is 6; 4 factorial
is 4 times 3 times 2 times 1,which is equal to 24 and in general
n factorial is equal to the product of all the wholenumbers up to n. So let's play around
with the calculator and verify some ofthese calculations. We'll start out by
trying one factorial; we'll press one andthen the factorial to get an answer 1.
We'll then do 2 factorial; 2 factorial,that's equal to 2. Three factorial is equal
to 6, and 4 factorial is equal to 24.So everything is as we expected but
let's say we put in a fraction like .5.We actually get a result!This isn't an error: you actually get a
number, and that's pretty interesting,and let's try and figure out what this
number is. Let's say we square the number,and just because I know what the value
is what i'm going to multiply it by 4,and we end up with 3.14159! This is
something we recognize; this is equal to pi!So, quite remarkably we found out that
one-half factorial is equal to thesquare root of pi divided by two! So where does 
this come from because it has nothing to dowith the definition that we have just
explained which we were all taught in school.So to explain how one half factorial is
equal to that value will start out bygraphing the factorial function.So 1 factorial is 1, 2 factorial is 2, 3
factorial is 6, and 4 factorial is 24.So these are the integer whole values of
the factorial function and if we want toextend it beyond the whole numbers we
can imagine connecting the dots.So one way we could extend the factorial
function we just draw a line between anytwo dots, and that could define values for
the factorial function for the decimals.We could try at smoothing out the curve;
there actually infinitely many ways wecan smooth out the curve. So we want to
figure out a way that we can smooth outthe curve which has desirable properties.
So we want to come up with the factorialfunction and we want the factorial of 1 --we want this to be equal to 1, so it
matches with the fact that one factorial is 1.We also want f(x + 1) equal x*f(x).
This allows us to say thefactorial thing that each new number is
the product of the ones before it.The final properties we want to graph to be
smooth and one way we can do that as wecould say that the log of f(x)
needs to be convex.So that's a function - I won't get into
the details, but the reason we have thisis if you have these conditions there's actually
a unique solution there's one function:the gamma function, that satisfies these
three conditions.So that's how we can extend the factorial
function and it's a complicated function.The gamma of x is equal to the integral from 0
to infinity of t to the power of x - 1times e to the power of -t, dt.So this will converge for some values of x;it won't converge for other values;but what we will do then, is we'll define
that x factorial is equal to gamma of x + 1.So this gamma function satisfies
all three of the properties to the left,so since x factorial is defined this way
we can then evaluate the gamma functionto find out that one-half factorial is
equal to square root of pi over 2.So why do we care about the gamma function?
Well, this type of integral actually comes upin many applications like quantum
physics, fluid dynamics, statistics,and even number theory.So there's a really important reason that
we want to extend the factorial function,and our calculators can
actually evaluate it.I hope you liked this video. Please
subscribe to my channel.You can support me on Patreon to get exclusive rewards.Catch me on my blog Mind Your Decisions,
on Twitter @preshtalwalkar, and youcan get my books, listed on my website.