A problem worthy of attack proves its
worth by fighting back.And that's what Fermat's last theorem was
doing, it was fighting back.So we are talking about Fermat's last theorem I
suppose the place to start is with Fermat,Pierre de Fermat,he was a 17th-century
mathematician living and working inFrance - not working as a mathematicianbut working as a judge. Every evening he'd go
home - and math was his hobby -one evening he was looking at an
equationwhich looks a bit like Pythagoras'
equation which I suppose isX squared plus Y squared equals Z
squared.And he was looking for whole number
solutions to that equation, and there arelots, you know there's 3 squared plus4 squared, 5 squared. So that's a
whole number solution tox^2 + y^2 = z^2.
Now Fermat asked himself the question:"What if I change this equation so
instead of it being x squared,what about if it's x cubed or x to
the fourth power? Are there solutions to that equation? So
in general we're talking aboutx^n + y^n = z^nx^n + y^n = z^nwhere n is bigger than 2. Does that
equationhave any whole number solution?" He
thought about it for a whileand couldn't find any whole number
solutions, and then he went one stepfurther:not only could he not find any whole
number solutions,he believed he found an argument, he
beleived he found a proofthat showed without any doubt
whatsoeverthere were no whole number solutions. So
this is kinda weird,because we have one equation
x^2 + y^2 = z^2that has not just one solution, it
actually has an infinite numberof solutions.And then we have an infinite number of
equations: x^3 + y^3 = z^3,x^4 + y^4 = z^4,an infinite number of equations which
apparently have no solutions.And Fermat discovered it's proof, and he
wrotein the margin of a book he was reading
that evening, called the Arithmetica by Diophantus,he wrote in the margin in his book, he
wrote: I have a truly marvelous proofwhich this margin is too narrow to
contain.Hanc marginis exiguitas non caperet
in Latin.In other words: "I know how to prove that
this equation has no solutions,but I don't have the space to write it
down." And then he drops dead.It very much was a secret proof which he
never wrote down,and after his death his son, Samuel Cl¨¦mantI think, rediscovered this book which had
this marginal note:I have a truly marvelous proof -
demonstrationem mirabilem - which these margins are too narrow to
contain. In fact the book is full ofthese little annoying notes: "I can prove
this but I gotta go to feed the cat, I can provethis but I gotta go and wash my hair."So Fermat was quite annoying in this
respect.So his son published a new version of the
book- the Arithmetica by Diophantus - 
the book with all of Fermat's littlenotes printed in the text. And people
would look at these notes,and they were: "Fermat
said he can prove this, let's try!"And one by one people rediscovered the
missing proofs.And every case where Fermat said
"I have a proof", he was right, there was aproof,except in this one example here.Fermat's last theorem is called Fermat's
last theorem because it was the last one thatanybody could actually find the proof for.
And of course because it's the last one thatanyone can proveit's the most precious one, it's the one
that's the most desirable.And the more that people try, the more
they fail, the more wonderful it becomes.And this goes on for decades, it goes
on for centuries.Right through to the 20th century were
people desperateto rediscover what Fermat's proof might
have been.[Brady]Is that they have widely-held that he
had done it or had he disclaimed, likewas he telling the truth? [Singh]I think by the
time we get to 20th century it's quite clear that this is an incredibly
complex problem. Itssimple to jot down in a few scribbles
what the question is, it's easy todescribe the problem.The proof is clearly profoundand probably beyond Fermat's reach to
be honest.Some people say Fermat was just fooling
around, that it was just a trick,that he left something in his book that he knew 
would trouble subsequent generations -I think that's the least likely.Some people say that he did have a
genuine proofand it's beautiful, it's elegant and it's
17th century,and we could kinda rediscover that
proof but we're just not quite clever enough.I think that's possible but unlikely.I think the most likely explanation is Fermatthought he had a proof. Because he was working
on his ownand because he didn't show this proof to
anybody elsenobody could tell him: "Ow, there is a mistake
there, that line 3has got something wrong with it." And
that's very likely because we know thatsubsequent generations of mathematiciansthought they'd found a proof and then
they publish it and people would tearit apart and find the error.So what we're looking for is not Fermat's
proof - which was probably flawed - but we're
looking for some kind of proof to see wheter Fermat was right all along?
It has a happy ending.And it starts with a ten-year-old child,a child called Andrew Wiles, who was reading a
book one day -he's growing up in Cambridge, he wents to
the library, he got a book called The lastproblem by E.T. Bell.And the book is all about
Fermat's last theorem.And little Andrew Wiles, age 10,decided that he was going to rediscover the
missing proof.Because a bright ten-year-old can
understand the problem. A bright ten-year-olddoesn't realize what they're letting
themselves in for, but that's another story. And he
tried, he talked about, to theschool teachers about the problem,he talked to his A-level teachers about the
problem, he goes to university talked to hisundergraduate lecturers about the problem.He has a PhD and still this problem is
obsessing him.I think he was about in his late 30's by
this time he was a Princeton professor -there was something called the
Taniyama-Shimura conjecture whichI kinda think we don't really
want to get into at the moment -which had been proposed in the 50's. So a 
conjecture is an idea thatwe don't know whether it's true or not,
but somebody is putting it on the table. Somebodyproved that there was a link between
these two conjectures.It is much as: if you could prove most of
the Taniyama-Shimura conjectureyou would get Fermat's last theorem for free.
So somehow Fermat's last theorem is embedded inthis other conjecture.And Andrew Wiles' childhood passion, his
childhood obsession is reignitedbecause he thinks the Taniyama-Shimura
conjecture is worth a go.You know he thinks he can get his teeth
into that. But it's stilla crazy thing to try and do and so
because it was such an absurd and ambitious challenge, Wiles didn't tell anybody
about it.He worked on in complete secrecy,he started not attending committee
meetings, he started going to his officeless and less, he started tofocus on this problem. Once again:not because it was the Taniyama-Shimura
conjecture but because it would give himFermat's last theorem for free.And for 7 years he worked in complete
secrecyand at the end of 7 years he
suddenly realizedthat he had Taniyama-Shimura and
if he had Taniyama-Shimura,he had a proof of Fermat's last theorem. He went
to Cambridge, he presented his proof on ablack board,it was a three-part lecture, the world
cheered, he was the front page of the New York Times, he wason CNN he was everywhere. But the
sting in the taleis that in any mathematical proof you
have to have it checked.You have to have it refereed and published, and
when he went through the checking process somebody found a mistake. Wiles assumed
that he could fix it,but the more he tried to unravel this
problem the worse it became.And it became a huge embarrassment, you know
you've been loathed(?) as the greatestmathematician of the 20th century,you are a hero figure and now you have to
admit you made a mistake.And it took a whole year, but at the end
of that yearAndrew Wiles working with a chap(?)
called Richard Taylormanaged to fix the proof. I think
it's a bit like the Terminator film, I often talk about,
you know when you just think you'veslained the monster when you've killed
the Terminator it comes back to life andyou have to fight in one last time.
And somebody, one mathematician I thinkPete Hinesonce wrote: "A problem worthy of attackproves its worth by fighting back." And
that's what Fermat's last theorem was doing,it was fighting back,but Wiles proved that he was too good. And of
course what Wiles provedis that Fermat was right, this equationx^n + y^n = z^n, n bigger than 2,has no whole number solutions and that's
the end of the story.[Brady]If you'd like to see a bit more from
this interview with Simon, I've got someextra footage,I'll put a link in the description. Simon's
also got a book about Fermat's lasttheorem, that's excellent, I recommend that,links below, and just this week he's got
a new book out -funny about that - it's all about
mathematics in the Simpsons and I thinkanyone who likes Numberphile is gonna
love this one.I'll put a link below, but he's also done an
interview with meabout Fermat's last theorem in the
Simpsons,which I think you'll all enjoy and I'll put
that on to Numberphile really soon.But in the meantime, lots of links below
I'll put a link to the Wiles paper,a few other bits and pieces that I want
you to see, so have a good look.