Today we're going to revise logic gatesfirst of allAND, OR and NOTLet's take a look to AND, first of allI am going to write out a so called a truth tablein my old way which it might be slightly differentto the way other people lay it outI like to lay these things out as in a sort ofsquare matrixLet's call here on the leftinput Ainto my "AND" gateand up at the top I'm going to talk about input B. 
It has two inputs and one output and the outputfrom the gate is represented inside this
square area here. So, the A input we're workingin binary as evercan take on values of 0 and 1 so can be
okay - AND is very simple.It says the outcome is true which is
normally denoted by a 1 nowadays in binary,the outcome is true only if both of
the inputs are true of course that'swhat and means in English that must be true 
and that must be trueso let's do 1 and 1 first of all, 1 and 1 is like true and trueyes the outcome is true but if you take
0 and 0, given that 0 means false thenthe AND can't be true because you're saying 
it's false and it's falseso the outcome is false - it's a zero 
and equally if one of them is true and oneof them is falsethe outcome still is false because the
outcome of an AND gate, for it to be true,both of them have got to be true. 
So you end up with a result matrix here lookwith three 0sin it and only one 1. Now, just this once I
won't do it for all of the others butjust this once I shall say, feel free to
write it down like this with a f and a t,standing for true and false, but it's
still the case that under AND logicfor the outcome to be trueyou must have a couple of true inputs here.So that's exactly the image of that
using fs and ts rather than 1s and 0s.If you're an electronics engineer
and you're building some electronics to dothese logic functions, what you would
draw is your AND gate with twoinputs A and B one output and yeah the
thing to remember is that the AND is afairly rounded kind of shape at the
front. But the point here is that theoutcome of doing A and B together can be
written in lots of ways you can write itas A AND B. Sometimes if you look in
logic textbooks you'll find that they usea thing looking like a little spike down
on the baseline that is the mathematicallogicians favorite way of saying AND
but it's the same thing as writing A N D.Very occasionally you'll also see A dot B.
That dot is like the one thatsome of you will have been taught at high
school to denote multiplication ratherthan using the multiplying symbol.It was noted early on that AND is a bit
like doing multiplication. Because if yousay, what happens if I just multiply the
two inputsinstead of doing this AND nonsense. Well 0
times 0 is 0, 1 times 0 is 0, that 1 multiplied by 1,1 times 1 is 1!You get the same outcome there as if
you'd be multiplying the 1sand 0s with each other and that is why
AND is sometimes called: logical product.OK now we've got the notation
established, we can go ahead fairlyquickly now on the other possibilities
here.Let's take a look at the OR gate. 
Well, for this which is the so-calledINCLUSIVE OR, if you want to give it it's 
full name.The rule is that the outcome is true if
either or both of the inputs are true.1 INCLUSIVE ORed with 1 - 1 OR 1, 
well, they're both true,so the outcome is true. 1 ORed with
0, if either one of them is truethe outcome is trueso you put a 1 there. Similarly 0 ORed with 1well, one of them is true so the outcome is
true and only 0 ORed with 0 givesyou a 0 or a false.So it's called an inclusive OR because
it includes this situation here wherethey really are both true to start with
writing it down in... what an electronicsengineer likes to seeHere you come, fast back go faster tail fin there 
and it slips around like thisThere is your OR gate with the A and a B
inputs here it comes the output and againwe can either write it down as A ORed with B 
or we could say A notice it'sthe opposite way around to the AND it
looks like a little V on the baselineso you can write it like that or many
people noted very early on when studyingmathematical logic that OR does more or
less behave like additionnot quite, I mean look at it 0 plus 0 is 0, 
0 plus 1 is 1, 1 plus 0 is 1, 1 plus 1ah... really referring back to the binary
adder video I did a week or two ago1 added to 1 should really put down
a 0 and carry a 1 but here it'sas if the carried bit's retained and held
inside but as far as logicians are concerneda lot of them like to call this the
logical sum. Whereas AND is the logical product.To complete these threethere's a very familiar indeed now, 
there is a very special one and that's ourgood old friend NOT, it's special in that
it doesn't take two operands, it onlytakes one operand. NOT is a simple
inverter, give it a 0 - it will turn itto a 1, give it a 1 -it'll turn it to a 0. So we've only
got one input let's call it a day.What's the outcome? Well, the outcome is a single
column now. It's not a square.Because what you're saying is, if you apply NOT
to 0 - you get a 1, if you apply NOT to 1 -you get a 0. It just flips it, as simple as that. 
And the circuit diagram, electronicstype notation which is a triangle with
a little circle at the end and whatcomes out of here.Well, there's lots of... ways of writing
NOT A, you can write it as NOT A,sometimes you'll see it written as
twiddle A. Sometimes you'll see that somelogicians like to use a thing like this
little bent crowbar to denoteNOT so that can also be used to call the
output NOT A. Those threetaken together are what's called
logically sufficient to do anything youwant in logic AND, OR and NOT taken
together. Dr. "Heartbleed" - bless his cotton socks -has done even more advanced stuff
with you now which I just mention.If you want to glue a NOT gate onto the
output of an OR gate say, so you do theINCLUSIVE OR but then the moment you
get it's result you flip its directionyou turn it over instead of just taking
that and gluing it onto thereyou're allowed to abbreviate by putting
the circle on the end of the OR gateit's still got the A and B inputs and
it's still got output but notice themoment you do the OR you turn it the
other way aroundthat's what the circle says so that is a
NOR gate and I know for a fact that Dr.Bagley has done that with you in one of
his videoswe'd like to thankaudible.com for sponsoring this computerphile videothey've got over a hundred thousand
titles to choose from and if you'd liketo try one out for freego over to audible.com/computer file
today I'd like to recommend red mars byKim Stanley Robinsonthere's been a lot of hype recently
about visiting in colonizing Mars andKim Stanley Robinson really captures
what this might be like to do it... itfeels very realistic not the sort of
utopian vision you get in some sciencefictionso check out red mars go to audible.com/computer filetry it out for free and thanks once
again to them for sponsoring thiscomputer video will be useful to refresh
our memory of how an or gate worksso that's an order and he has two inputs
which were labeled as A and B