Last weekend I actually did a talk on math in the Simpsons here in Melbourne and I am going tosplit it up into three different videos so
today get the first one nice and shotsome of you will be familiar with this
first clip but I think I've got a fewtwists and turns to add to all this which will
entertain most of you. Okay, here we go: (Homer) Something you don'tsee every day. Anybody lose their classes?
Last chance. The sum of the square roots of any two sidesof an isosceles triangle is equal to the
square root of the remaining side. (Guy in the cubicle). That's aright triangle you idiot!That's great. So what does he say? Well, that. The sum of the square roots of any two sides of an isosceles triangleis equal to the square root of the remaining side. Which sounds verysimilar to this guy, right? Pythagoras, a squared plus b squared equals c squared.Well, it sounds very similar so what if he
actually meant to say this what were hismistakes?Well, the guy in the background already
pointed out one of them. It is not anisosceles triangle, it's a right triangle.
What else there'sthere's other things that don't work.
(Giuseppe) Any two sides?  That's fine so anytwo sides, it's got to be those two here in Pythagoras and then there is one more which isof course... (Giuseppe) the sum of the square roots. The sum of the square roots does not work, any two sides does not work but that got me thinking, I meanHomer knows what an isosceles triangle is? That's ridiculous!So maybe he actually did not have Pythagoras in mind. Maybehe learned it somewhere else. And there is actually another Simpsons episode that gives us a bit of a hint.where he may have learned it. (Lisa) There is new marshmellows in the Belfast charms. (Marge) No, no that's Bart's cereal. It's the only way I can get him to take his vitamins.(Bart) The sum of the square roots of any two sides of an isosceles triangle is equal to the square root of the remaining side. (Lisa) That's not right itis my lines as the scarecrow in The Wizard of Oz. The scarecrow in the Wizard of Oz.Actually, if you go to the movie and you find. the (Scarecrow) The sum of the square roots of any two sides of an isosceles triangle is equal to the square root of the remaining side.Oh joy rapture, I've got a brain.So he says this after he's got the brain.well you could have bad deal but maybe
not maybe maybe he's rightjust because the sound similar to what I
would doesn't mean that has to becorrect that have a very very close slow
it is correct what makes not tried buttwo sides that have all right now what
does it say if I don't despair of thisat all of that you get out of this but
he also says you can't do this any twosides should also be able to start of
this perspective that is scared of thattoo let's also right that one now have a
look at this one doesn't know where thatit's ok but I mean you've got two tons
as scared of even on two sides of theequation to what can we do it can just
cancel cancel goes and then what's leftover its gonna be equal to 0 which means
that these equal to 0 may be consideredas I was trying but usually not so I
mean there's definitely something that'snot quite right but let us forget about
this any to side business maybe maybemaybe just this once met a lot of a
beating him enter the window asreporters two things together to go but
we don't know where to get one squareroots so now we'll have a really close
look at it and actually can do this inpictures so what does says we've got
like a a and B is four times as long asa and three obvious make any triangle of
anything like this soforget about it it's big it's not gonna
work out so it's pretty wrong very wrongbut it can get even have a look at any
China what ever you can actually get soagain to get ready to square root square
holding a square here so now when we getto you we get the first time i squared
plus two times that plus so what's theSun squared and then we get plus can see
ok now just rearranged as a little bitand you get a + be + something but he
says is that she is a little bit longerthan a and be put together so there's a
tizzy and see a little bit longer andagain it's pretty obvious so it's pretty
wrong also I mean this this this is asocialist triangle in the plane what
happens if you actually kind of look attriangles maybe on a on a sphere
anything like this can you actually getlike 100 to work anywherewell well in the plane but really kills
this one here is the fact that in anytriangle and be always add up to
something that's bigger ditsy and basicthe Scarecrow contradicts so what we're
really aiming for is a world in whichdisc I here's the triangle inequality in
and actually turns out that very hard tofind anything reasonable where this
doesn't hold the phone sample if youlook at triangle honest here they also
decided so even on a three-yearscarecrows work workbut you know there's a lot of
mathematicians out there who reallyreally strange work so maybe one of you
has an idea for strange world where wecan actually make us work ok but now
actually also started digging to seewhat I can actually find pythagoras now
pythagoras actually does pop up in thisinstance I know of two instances and
actually one of your mission is going tobe too she got out where exactly in
those clips pops up maybe some of youactually know of other instances
scarecrow in the sense that I'd reallylike to know about it even other at the
moviesepisode of a TV episodes really
interesting running out and put insimpson's lovers among you as a pinpoint
all the episodes of these things are oklook at first slip and see what he can
do you just like the one you know it'sfalse advertising no refunds paid for a
colossalgoodmay have to do this on train before
impact but don't get a credit crunchthat 44 today