[INTRO MUSIC]Hey everyone, Grant here. This is the first video in a series on the essence of calculus.and I'll be publishing the following videos once per day for the next 10 days.The goal here, as the name suggests, is to really get the heart of the subject outin one binge watchable set. But with a topic that's as broad as calculus.there's a lot of things that can mean. So, here's what I've in my mind specifically.Calculus has a lot of rules and formulas which are often presented asthings to be memorised.Lots of derivative formulas, the product rule, the chain rule, implicit differentiation,the fact that integrals and derivatives are opposite, Taylorseries; just a lot of things like that.And my goal is for you to come awayfeeling like you could have inventedcalculus yourself. That is, cover allthose core ideas, but in a way that makesclear where they actually come from andwhat they really mean using anall-around visual approach. Inventingmath is no joke, and there is adifference between being told whysomething's true and actually generatingit from scratch. But at all points I wantyou to think to yourself if you were anearly mathematician, pondering theseideas and drawing out the right diagrams,does it feel reasonable that you couldhave stumbled across these truths yourself?In this initial video, I want toshow how you might stumble into the coreideas of calculus by thinking verydeeply about one specific bit ofgeometry: the area of a circle. Maybe youknow that this is pi times its radiussquared, but why? Is there a nice way tothink about where this formula comes from?Well, contemplating this problem andleaving yourself open to exploring theinteresting thoughts that come about canactually lead you to a glimpse of threebig ideas in calculus: integrals,derivatives, and the fact that they're opposites.But the story starts more simply！justyou and a circle; let's say with radius three.You're trying to figure out itsarea, and after going through a lot ofpaper trying different ways to chop upand rearrange the pieces of that area,many of which might lead to their owninteresting observations, maybe you tryout the idea of slicing up the circleinto many concentric rings. This shouldseem promising because it respects thesymmetry of the circle, and math has atendency to reward you when you respectits symmetries. Let's take one of thoserings which has some inner radius Rthat's between 0 and 3.If we can find a niceexpression for the area of eachring like this one, and if we have a niceway to add them all up, it might lead usto an understanding of the full circle's area.Maybe you start by imaginingstraightening out this ring.And you could try thinking throughexactly what this new shape is and whatits area should be, but for simplicitylet's just approximate it as a rectangle.The width of that rectangle is thecircumference of the original ring, whichis two pi times R. Right? I mean that'sessentially the definition of pi; and itsthickness? Well that depends on howfinely you chopped up the circle in thefirst place, which was kind of arbitrary.In the spirit of using what will come tobe standard calculus notation, let's callthat thickness dr, for a tiny differencein the radius from one ring to the next.Maybe you think of it as something like 0.1.So, approximating this unwrapped ringas a thin rectangle, its area is 2 pitimes R, the radius, times dr, thelittle thickness. And even though that'snot perfect, for smaller and smallerchoices of dr, this is actually going tobe a better and better approximation forthat area, since the top and the bottomsides of this shape are going to getcloser and closer to being exactly thesame length. So let's just move forwardwith this approximation, keeping in theback of our minds that it's slightlywrong, but it's going to become moreaccurate for smaller and smaller choicesof dr. That is, if we slice up the circleinto thinner and thinner rings. So justto sum up where we are, you've broken upthe area of the circle into all of theserings, and you're approximating the areaof each one of those as two pi times itsradius times dr, where the specificvalue for that inner radius ranges fromzero, for the smallest ring, up to justunder three, for the biggest ring, spacedout by whatever the thickness is that youchoose for dr！something like 0.1.And notice that the spacingbetween the values here corresponds tothe thickness dr of each ring, thedifference in radius from one ring tothe next. In fact, a nice way to thinkabout the rectangles approximating eachring's area is to fit them all up-rightside by side along this axis. Each onehas a thickness dr, which is why theyfit so snugly right there together, andthe height of any one of theserectangles sitting above some specificvalue of R！like 0.6！isexactly 2 pi timesthat value. That's the circumference of thecorresponding ring that this rectangle approximates. Pictures like this two pi Rcan actually get kind of tall for thescreen. I mean 2 times pi times 3is around 19, so let's just throwup a y-axis that's scaled a littledifferently, so that we can actually fitall of these rectangles on the screen.A nice way to think about this setup is todraw the graph of two pi r which is astraight line that has a slope two pi.Each of these rectangles extends up tothe point where it just barely touches that graph.Again we're being approximate here.Each of these rectangles onlyapproximates the area of thecorresponding ring from the circle, butremember, that approximation, 2 pi Rtimes dr, gets less and less wrong asthe size of dr gets smaller and smaller.And this has a very beautiful meaningwhen we're looking at the sum of theareas of all those rectangles.For smaller and smaller choices of dr, youmight at first think that that turns theproblem into a monstrously large sum.I mean there's many many rectangles toconsider and the decimal precision ofeach one of their areas is going to bean absolute nightmare! But notice; all oftheir areas in aggregate just looks likethe area under a graph, and that portionunder the graph is just a triangle.A  triangle with a base of 3 and a heightthat's 2 pi times 3. So its area, 1/2base times height, works out to beexactly pi times 3 squared; or if theradius of our original circle was someother value capital R that area comesout to be pi times R squared, and that'sthe formula for the area of a circle!It doesn't matter who you are or what youtypically think of math that right thereis a beautiful argument.But if you want to think like amathematician here,you don't just care about finding theanswer; you care about developing generalproblem-solving tools and techniques.So take a moment to meditate onwhat exactly just happened and why it worked,cause the way that we transitionedfrom something approximate to somethingprecise is actually pretty subtle, and itcuts deep to what calculus is all about.You had this problem that can beapproximated with the sum of many smallnumbers, each of which looked like 2 pi Rtimes dr for values of R rangingbetween 0 and 3.Remember, the small number dr hererepresents our choice for the thicknessof each ring！for example 0.1. And thereare two important things to note here.First of all, not only is dr a factor inthe quantities we're adding up！2 pi Rtimes dr！it also gives the spacingbetween the different values of R.And secondly, the smaller our choice for drthe better the approximation.Adding all of those numbers could be seen in adifferent pretty clever way as addingthe areas of many thin rectanglessitting underneath a graph. The graph ofthe function 2 pi R in this case.Then！and this is key！by considering smallerand smaller choices for dr correspondingto better and better approximations of the original problem, this sum, thoughtof as the aggregate area of thoserectangles, approaches the area under thegraph; and because of that, you canconclude that the answer to the originalquestion in full un-approximatedprecision is exactly the same as thearea underneath this graph.A lot of other hard problems in math andscience can be broken down andapproximated as the sum of many smallquantities. Things like figuring out howfar a car has traveled based on itsvelocity at each point in time. In a caselike that you might range through manydifferent points in time and at each onemultiply the velocity at that time timesa tiny change in time, dt, which wouldgive the corresponding little bit ofdistance traveled during that littletime. I'll talk through the details ofexamples like this later in the series,but at a high level many of these typesof problems turn out to be equivalent tofinding the area under some graph.In  much the same way that our circleproblem did. This happens whenever thequantities that you're adding up,the one whose sum approximates theoriginal problem, can be thought of asthe areas of many thin rectanglessitting side-by-side like this.If finer and finer approximations of theoriginal problem correspond to thinnerand thinner rings, then the originalproblem is going to be equivalent tofinding the area under some graph.Again, this is an idea we'll see in more detaillater in the series, so don't worry ifit's not 100% clear right now.The point now is that you, as themathematician having just solved aproblem by reframing it as the areaunder a graph, might start thinking abouthow to find the areas under other graphs.I mean we were lucky in the circleproblem that the relevant area turnedout to be a triangle. But imagine insteadsomething like a parabola, the graph of xsquared. What's the area underneath thatcurve say between the values of x equalszero and x equals 3? Well, it's hardto think about, right? And let me reframethat question in a slightly different way:we'll fix that left endpoint in place atzero and let the right endpoint vary.Are you able to find a function A(x)that gives you the area under thisparabola between 0 and x? A functionA(x) like this is called an integral ofx-squared. Calculus holds within it thetools to figure out what an integrallike this is, but right now it's just amystery function to us. We know it givesthe area under the graph of x squaredbetween some fixed left point and somevariable right point, but we don't knowwhat it is. And again, the reason we careabout this kind of question is not justfor the sake of asking hard geometryquestions; it's because many practicalproblems that can be approximated byadding up a large number of small thingscan be reframed as a question about anarea under a certain graph. And I'll tellyou right now that finding this areathis integral function, is genuinely hardand whenever you come across a genuinelyhard question in math a good policy isto not try too hard to get at the answerdirectly, since usually you just end upbanging your head against a wall.Instead, play around with the idea, with noparticular goal in mind. Spend some timebuilding up familiarity with theinterplay between the function definingthe graph, in this case x squared, and thefunction giving the area.In that playful spirit if you're luckyhere's something that you might noticeWhen you slightly increase x by sometiny nudge dx look at the resultingchange in area represented with thissliver that I'm going to call dA for atiny difference in area. That sliver canbe pretty well approximated with arectangle one whose height is x squaredand whose width is dx, and the smallerthe size of that nudge dx the more thatsliver actually looks like a rectangle.Now this gives us an interesting way tothink about how A(x) is related tox-squared. A change to the output of A,this little dA, is about equal to xsquared, where X is whatever input youstarted at, times dx,the little nudge to the input thatcaused A to change. Or rearranged dAdivided by dx, the ratio of a tiny changein A to the tiny change in x that caused it, is approximately whatever x squaredis at that point, and that's anapproximation that should get better andbetter for smaller and smaller choicesof dx. In other words, we don't know whatA(x) is; that remains a mystery, but wedo know a property that this mysteryfunction must have. When you look at twonearby points for example 3 & 3.001consider the change to the output of Abetween those two points！the differencebetween the mystery function evaluatedat 3.001 and evaluated at 3. That changedivided by the difference in the inputvalues, which in this case is 0.001,should be about equal to the value of xsquared for the starting input！in thiscase 3 squared.And this relationship between tinychanges to the mystery function and thevalues of x-squared itself is true atall inputs not just 3. That doesn'timmediately tell us how to find A(x),but it provides a very strong clue thatwe can work with.and there's nothing special about thegraph x squared here. Any functiondefined as the area under some graph hasthis property that dA divided bydx！a slight nudge to the output of A dividedby a slight nudge to the input thatcaused it！is about equal to the heightof the graph at that point.Again, that's an approximation that gets better andbetter for smaller choices of dx.And here, we're stumbling into another bigidea from calculus: "Derivatives". Thisratio dA divided by dx is called thederivative of A, or more technically thederivative is whatever this ratioapproaches as dx gets smaller andsmaller. Although, I dive much more deeplyinto the idea of a derivative in thenext video, but loosely speaking it's ameasure of how sensitive a function isto small changes in its input. You'll seeas the series goes on that there aremany many ways that you can visualize aderivative depending on what functionyou're looking at and how you thinkabout tiny nudges to its output.And we care about derivatives becausethey help us solve problems, and in ourlittle exploration here, we already havea slight glimpse of one way that they'reused. They are the key to solvingintegral questions, problems that requirefinding the area under a curve.Once you gain enough familiarity with computingderivatives, you'll be able to look at asituation like this one where you don'tknow what a function is but you do knowthat its derivative should be x squaredand from that reverse engineer what thefunction must be. And this back and forthbetween integrals and derivatives wherethe derivative of a function for thearea under a graph gives you back thefunction defining the graph itself iscalled the "Fundamental theorem ofcalculus". It ties together the two bigideas of integrals and derivatives, andit shows how, in some sense, each one isan inverse of the other.All of this is only a high-level view:just a peek at some of the core ideasthat emerge in calculus, and what followsin the series are the details forderivatives and integrals and more.At all points I want you to feel that youcould have invented calculus yourself.That if you drew the right pictures andplayed with each idea in just the rightway, these formulas and rules andconstructs that are presented could havejust as easily popped out naturally fromyour own explorations, and before you goit would feel wrong not to give thepeople who supported this series onPatreon a well-deserved thanks both fortheir financial backing as well as forthe suggestions they gave while theseries was being developed.You see supporters got early access tothe videos as I made them, and they'llcontinue to get early access for futureessence of type series and as a thanksto the communityI keep ads off of new videos for theirfirst month. I'm still astounded that Ican spend time working on videos likethese, and in a very direct way you arethe one to thank for that.