A line goes through the points (-1, 6)and (5, 4). What is the equation of the line?Let's just try to visualize this. So that is myx axis. And you don't have to draw itto do this problem but it always help to visualizeThat is my y axis. And the first point is (-1,6)So (-1, 6). So negative 1 coma, 1, 2, 3, 4 ,5 6.So it's this point, rigth over there, it's (-1, 6).And the other point is (5, -4). So 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.And we go down 4, So 1, 2, 3, 4So it's right over there. So the line connects themwill looks something like this. Line willdraw a rough approximation.I can draw a straighter than that. I will draw a dotted line maybeEasier do dotted line.So the line will looks something like that.So let's find its equation. So good place to startis we can find its slope.Remember, we want, we can find the equationy is equal to mx plus b.This is the slope-intercept form where m is the slope and b is the y-intercept.We can first try to solve for m. We can find the slope of this line.So m, or the slope is the change in y over the change in x.Or, we can view it as the y value of our end pointminus the y value of our starting point overthe x-value of our end point minus the x-value of our starting point.Let me make that clear. So this is equal tochange in y over change in x wich is the same thing asrise over run wich is the same thing as the y-value ofyour ending point minus the y-value of your starting point.This is the same exact thing as change in y and that overthe x value of your ending point minus the x-value of your starting pointThis is the exact same thing as change in x.And you just have to pick one of these as the starting pointand one as the ending point. So let's just make this over hereour starting point and make that our ending point.So what is our change in y?So our change in y, to go we started at yis equal to six, we started at y is equal to 6.And we go down all the way to y is equal to negative 4So this is rigth here, that is our change in yYou can look at the graph and say, oh,if I start at 6 and I go to negative 4 I went down 10.or if you just want to use this formula here it will give you the same thingWe finished at negative 4, we finished at negative 4and from that we want to subtract, we want to subtract 6.This right here is y2, our ending y and this is our beginning yThis is y1. So y2, negative 4 minus y1, 6.or negative 4 minus 6.That is equal to negative 10.And all it does is tell us the change in yyou go from this point to that pointWe have to go down, our rise is negativewe have to go down 10. That's where the negative 10 comes from.Now we just have to find our change in x.So we can look at this graph over here.We started at x is equal to negative 1 and we go all the wayto x is equal to 5. So we started at x is equal to negative 1,and we go all the way to x is equal to 5.So it takes us one to go to zero and then five more.So are change in x is 6.You can look at that visually there oryou can use this formula same exact idea,our ending x-value, our ending x-value is 5and our starting x-value is negative 1.5 minus negative 1. 5 minus negative 1 is the same thing as5 plus 1. So it is 6. So our slope here is negative 10 over 6.wich is the exact same thing as negative 5 thirds.as negative 5 over 3 I divided the numerator and the denominator by 2.So we now know our equation will bey is equal to negative 5 thirds, that's our slope,x plus b. So we still need to solve for y-intercept to get our equation.And to do that, we can use the information that we knowin fact we have several points of informationWe can use the fact that the line goes through the point (-1,6)you could use the other point as well.We know that when is equal to negative 1,So y is eqaul to 6. So y is equal to six when x is equal to negative 1So negative 5 thirds times x, when x is equal to negative 1y is equal to 6. So we literally just substitute this x and y valueback into this and know we can solve for b.So let's see, this negative 1 times negative 5 thirds.So we have 6 is equal to positive five thirds plus b.And now we can subtract 5 thirds from both sides of this equation.so we have subtracted the left hand side.From the left handside and subtracted from the rigth handsideAnd then we get, what's 6 minus 5 thirds.So that's going to be, let me do it over hereWe take a common denominator. So 6 is the same thing asLet's do it over here. So 6 minus 5 over 3 is the same thing as6 is the same thing as 18 over 3 minus 5 over 36 is 18 over 3. And this is just 13 over 3. And this is just 13 over 3.And then of course, these cancel out. So we getb is equal to 13 thirds. So we are done. We knowWe know the slope and we know the y-intercept.The equation of our line is y is equal tonegative 5 thirds x plus our y-intercept which is 13which is 13 over 3. And we can write these as mixed numbers.if it's easier to visualize. 13 over 3 is four and 1 thirds.So this y-intercept right over here.this y-intercept right over here. That's 0 coma 13 over 3 or0 coma 4 and 1 thirds. And even with my very roughly drawn diagramit those looks like this. And the slope negative 5 thirdsthat's the same thing as negative 1 and 2 thirds.You can see here the slope is downward because the slope is negative.It's a little bit steeper than a slope of 1.It's not quite a negative 2. It's negative 1 and 2 thirds.if you write this as a negative, as a mixed number.So, hopefully, you found that entertaining.