Welcome to another Mathologer video. It's
something that only a few experts amongyou will be aware of but pretty much
every single Mathologer video featuresfresh maths, made up just for you. Every
once in a while I even sneak in some ofmy own little theorems and proofs.
Today's video is one of those videos.What I want to show you today are some
new beautifully visual ways to prove theirrationality of some small integer
roots like root 2, as well as some reallycool and closely related mathematical
gems. And it's all based on what Iusually refer to as triangular squares.
What the hell is a triangular square?Well, it's definitely not clickbait. Okay
what I mean by triangular squares areequilateral triangles that are made up
of mini equilateral triangles like thatone over there. Why triangular squares?
Because the number of mini triangles isalways a square, namely the total width
in terms of mini triangles squared. Inthis case the width of the big triangle
is 5-mini triangles and I claim thereare exactly 5 squared equals 25 of these
mini triangles. Okay, I've prepared areally nice animated proof that this is
the case in general. Ready to be dazzled?Here we go. Okay, yeah and it's getting
squarish there. And done! There 5 squared.This is an incredibly beautiful proof
and if you don't agree then there'ssomething really, really really wrong
with you and it's probably time toswitch to a non maths channel. Also
hiding just around the corner there'ssome more beautiful stuff, too good to
pass over and so let's just savour that toobefore we go all irrational.
Note that the layers of a triangularsquare are consecutive odd numbers. So
one yellow triangle in the first layer,three orange in the second layer, then 5,
7 and 9. And so 1 plus 3 plus5 plus 7 plus 9, the sum of the
first five odd numbers is five squared.Doing the same for general triangular
squares  proves that the sumof the first N odd numbers is N squared.
Also super beautiful isn't it? Anywayfor what follows you only need to
remember that a triangular square ofwidth N contains N squared
mini triangles. I now want to usetriangular squares to prove that the
square root of 3 is irrational, thatis, that the number root 3 cannot be
written as a fraction, as a ratio ofintegers. To prove this let's assume that
it's in fact possible to express root3 as such a fraction. Okay and let's
also assume that A and B are as small aspossible. Then squaring both sides andsimplifying gives this here. Okay but
then of course 3B squared equals Asquared. That's the same as saying that B
squared plus B squared plus B squaredequals A squared. So what does this mean? This means that if root 3 wasrational, then the equation X squared
plus X squared plus X squared equals Ysquared would have positive integer
solutions and that B squared plus Bsquared plus B squared equals A squared
would be the smallest such solution. Butthis would also mean that combined the
three green triangular squares of widthB would contain exactly the same number
of mini triangles as the triangular squaregrid of width A on the right. And this
would mean that all the mini greentriangles on the left would fit exactly
into a large grid on the right. Andhere's a super stylish way to begin an
attempt to fit them.Pretty :) Anyway this attempt results in
three dark green triangle overlaps andan empty triangle patch in the middle.
This patch and the overlaps would alsobe triangular squares, right? However
since they are just enough mini greentriangles, the three dark green overlap
triangles together must exactly fill thewhite triangular grid. But that's
absolutely impossible! Why? Because wesupposedly started with the absolutely
smallest way to express a square as thesum of three other squares, that one up
there. And, of course, no solution can besmaller than the smallest one.
Well we've played this game a couple oftimes already in the  last couple of videos so you should be okay with that. Now theonly way to resolve this contradiction
is to conclude that the assumption westarted with, namely that root 3 is a
fraction is false.In other words, root 3 is irrational,
or equivalently, the equation X squaredplus X squared plus X squared equals Y
squared has no solutions in positiveintegers. How slick is that? :) Now, using
similarly stunning triangle choreographywe can also show that root 2, root 5 and
root 6 are irrational. Now before I do thatlet me hammer the crux of our proof by
contradiction just one more time. Okay, soroot 3 being a fraction is equivalent to
there being three identical triangularsquares adding to another triangular
square, right? And the contradictionhinges on us showing that if this was
really possible for some triangularsquares, then the same would be possible
using even smaller triangular squares.So, now let's see how to prove that root 2
is irrational. Root 2 being a fractionis equivalent to there being TWO
identical triangular squares adding toanother triangular square, like that. And
to make the contradiction work we thensimply have to show that this equality
implies another equality involving evensmaller triangular squares. And here's
how we can capture those smallertriangular squares.Llet's chase them down.
Okay...pretty, pretty, pretty, pretty, very nice. At
this point the dark green overlap wouldbe exactly as large as the white empty
area. Now let's shift the overlap down. Thiswould fill some of the empty area and
create new overlaps. There two smallertriangular squares adding to another
triangular square, which then unleashesthe contradiction and proves that root
2 is irrational as well.Here's a little puzzle for you. We have
to have a puzzle! And there will be more.Have another look at this picture here.
Can you see an even easier way to arriveat a contradiction, that is, can you see
two other small triangular squares thatadd to one large triangular square. It's
really jumping out at me but see whetheryou can see it, too. Let me now show you
the root five and six triangularchoreographies followed by some
choreographies using actual squares andpentagons. First root 6 with 6
triangular squares adding to anothertriangular square. Here we go. (Music playing)Beautiful you must agree. Two
things before I move on.When using the root 5 and root 6
choreographies to show the irrationalityof these numbers one actually also has
to make sure that the various darkoverlaps in the animations always exist
and are of the same size.I leave filling in the details as
another puzzle for you. The root 5choreographies are particularly tricky
to pin down. For example, in the pentagonroot 5 choreography it's not even clear
where the squares are. Again considerfilling in the details as a puzzle, or
check out the write-up in thedescription of the video. Longtime
Mathologer fans may remember that in theearly days of the channel I did a video
on proving that root 2 is irrationalusing the simple square choreography. In
fact, it was this beautiful proof bymathematician Stanley Tennenbaum and 
popularised by the great John Conwaythat started this whole line of
investigation. A paper expanding on thisidea was authored by Stephen Miller and
David Montague who discovered the root 3triangle and the root 5 pentagon
choreographies. My contributions are thetriangular square root 2, 5 and 6
choreographies and using triangularsquares to illustrate things. Anyway, all
this is just the start of much morereally, really beautiful mathematics, such
as: 1) nearest miss solutions to ourimpossible equations; 2) best rational
approximations to our small integerroots; and 3) a really nice paradoxical
insight about triangular numbers tofinish things off. Well let's go. Remember,
by proving that root 3 is irrational wealso proved that the equation X squared
plus X squared plus X squared equals = Ysquared has no positive integer
solutions. This means that the threegreen triangular squares together and
the white triangular square that I used toillustrate the proof actually cannot
have the same number of mini triangles.In fact I chose the numbers on the left
and right to be as close as possiblediffering by just 1, And so 15 and 26
form what I want to call annearest miss solution to the equation X
squared plus X squared plus X squaredequals Y squared, the next best thing to
an integer solution. Among other thingsthis means that 26 over 15 is an
extremely good approximation of root 3,sort of the root 3 counterpart of PI's
22 over 7. Have a look. Pretty good, right?When we run our choreography, we start
with this propeller formation here andafter our triangles finish their dance
we end up with another propellerformation. Even better the new triangular
squares correspond to another nearestmiss solution, that one down there. Let's
unleash the choreography on this smallpropeller. Okay, there, yet another
propeller and another nearest misssolution one, there. Now clearly something
goes wrong if we try this one more timeand I'll leave it as yet another puzzle
for you to figure out what but if wecan't go on forever in one direction,
let's go the other way. Let's run thechoreography in reverse. Here we go. So
everything going in reverse. Larger,even larger. Now we're back to where we
started from. But why stop here? Let'sjust keep on going, right?Okay and now we are one step up. It's
probably not so surprising and it's nothard to show that this new propeller
also corresponds to a nearest-miss, likethis. Okay, so the numbers pan out like
this here and you can check that this isreally true. In fact, it's not too hard to
prove that if we keep on going we'llalways get nearest miss solutions and in
fact, we get all nearest miss solutionsto our equation in this way. Anyway
here's a list of the smallest of thesenearest miss solutions. Okay now if we take the ratios from top to bottom this willgive better and better approximations of
root 3. Let's check this.So 2 over 1, 7 over 4, 26 over 15 and there
I've highlighted how many digits we getcorrect. In fact the sequence of these fractionsconverges to root 3, so if we combine
all our propellers containing all ofthese ratios into one large picture, in
some sense this overall picture capturesroot 3, IS root 3. So this is root 3 have
you ever seen root 3, this is it. Verypretty, right? And as you've probably
already guessed everything I just saidabout root 3 can also be shown to work
for the root 2, root 5, and root 6choreographies. Now just for fun, here's a
picture of root 2 corresponding to theoriginal Tenenbaum choreography. Also
super pretty right? Now there are somemore footnotes that I really should add:
1) about a second type of nearest misssolution; 2)  about irrationality of integer
roots in general; 3) Pell's equation; and 4) someinteresting connections with infinite
continued fractions. For those of youinterested I'll put some footnotes in
the description of this video.But for the finale of this video let me
tell you about a freaky alternate numberreality to which our triangle
choreographies can be applied, as well asa very paradoxical puzzle for you that
pops up in this context. Have a look atthis. I call this a triangular triangle.
Well nobody in the universe does thatexcept for me, but who's going to stop me,
right, I'm the Mathologer :) Puzzle for you:Figure out the motivation behind this
strange name. It's not hard. Anyway thenumber of hexagons in a triangular
triangle of width N is called the Nthtriangular number (hint :) T_n. So T_1 is
just 1, T_2 is 1 plus 2 equals 3, T_3 is 1plus 2 plus 3 equals 6, and so on. And so
the nth triangular number T_n is justthe sum of the first n positive integers
which, as many of you will know, is equalto n times n plus 1  over 2 so for
example T_5 the number of hexagons inthis triangular triangle is equal to 15.
Now, just like the integer squares, thetriangular numbers also feature prominently in number theory and a lot of famousmathematicians have proved theorems
about them. For example, up there is oneof the most famous entries in Gauss's
mathematical notebook. It says that everypositive integer is the sum of at most
three triangular numbers. You can tellthat Gauss was really excited about
having found a proof for this. Just havea look at the Eureka in really bold
letters preceding the statement.Now important for us is the related
fact that,unlike squares, there are instances where
three times a triangular number equalsanother triangular number. Here's an
example so T_20 plus T_20 plus T_20 isequal to T_35. Let's unleash our root
3 choreography on this set-up andsee what happens.So, obviously, this propellor corresponds
to a smaller triangular number sum thatalso works, this one here. T_5 plus T_5
plus T_5 is equal toT_9. In fact,we can run the choreography forwards and
backwards to generate all instances ofthree identical triangular numbers
adding to another triangular number. Nowhere's my main puzzle for you. Forget
about the other ones. If you just wantone, this is it: the smaller equation
follows from the larger one, right, so whydoesn't this prove, just as in the case
of triangular squares, that threeidentical triangular numbers cannot add
to another triangular number?That's a tricky one, let's see whether
anybody can figure it out. Anyway, that'sit for today.